Preface

   Canadians  are  proud  of  their  land and  their
shared values  and the advantages  and opportunities
provided by Canadian citizenship.  But Canadians are
now searching for new  arrangements that will  serve
as a  blueprint for the future. We are all searching
for change that will  enable the country to preserve
what is cherished, while growing to meet the demands
of a new and competitive world. 

   Over the past year, the Government of  Canada has
been developing  proposals  that  would  revise  the
rules that shape the country's  political life. Many
of those rules are set out in  the Constitution, and
changing them will require formal amendment. But not
all   reforms   will  require   amendments   to  the
Constitution. The proposals set out here incorporate
both constitutional and non-constitutional change.

   These proposals are  intended to give  focus to a
national dialogue.  They represent an  invitation to
all Canadians across this  country to participate in
a genuine  political renewal. The  objective of this
process  is  a  better  and  stronger  Canada  which
reflects our  true values  and allows us  to achieve
our common goals and objectives while respecting our
diversity. These proposals attempt to identify  some
basic  realities and a concept  to guide the debate.
But the  Government is  open to any  suggestion that
will improve the proposals.

   A   Special  Joint  Committee  of  the  House  of
Commons  and the  Senate  has  been  established  to
provide Canadians with  a way  to take  part in  the
renewal process. The process will benefit from broad
participation.  Provincial  task  forces  have  been
created and  many individual  initiatives are  under
way.   The  Government's   proposals  have   already
benefited  from  such participation,  including  the
suggestions  of  thousands  of  Canadians  funnelled
through  the  Citizens'  Forum on  Canada's  Future.
Above  all,  the  Government  of  Canada  wants  all
Canadians  to  review  these  proposals and  channel
their own views and reactions into the process. Over
the next five months, Canadians have an unparalleled
chance to have their say.

   Once Canadians  have  had  their  opportunity  to
respond  to these proposals,  the Government intends
to move forward  with determination  and resolve  to
achieve the changes  that we  must make  to shape  a
stronger and  better country  and a  more prosperous
future for all Canadians.



Introduction

Shaping Canada's Future Together


   Canada today is  a society of  freedom, tolerance
and compassion. 

   Our  history tells  of our  achievements.  Canada
has  been  home  to  aboriginal peoples,  the  first
organized societies in North America,  for thousands
of  years. Europeans  arrived nearly  five centuries
ago, followed by  peoples from all  over the  world.
They  began  building  settlements  that  eventually
spanned  the  breadth  of  a  continent. Canada  has
developed  a renowned  system of  social  and health
services. Our reputation as a leader in peacekeeping
is respected around the  world. Our economy is among
the most  prosperous in the world. We  have grown to
become a  member of the  group of the  world's seven
largest industrialized  economies. The land  itself,
vast and  beautiful, is  a rich inheritance  held in
trust for future generations.

   These are accomplishments  that do justice to the
high hopes of the  Fathers of Confederation. George-
tienne Cartier expressed  his vision in 1867 in  the
following words:


   I   hope   that   this   grand   project   of
   Confederation,  achieved under  the  best  of
   circumstances, will produce results that  are
   as satisfying as  they are lasting. We sealed
   our  federal   pact  without  bloodshed   and
   without  exploitation  of  the  weak  by  the
   strong. All it took was fairness, justice and
   some compromises on both sides.


   I  hope that if it  must be amended,  it will
   not be  to narrow the  principles of fairness
   on which it is founded, but rather to enlarge
   them even more....

   Canada's  architects   in  1867  understood  that
federalism  was  the  only  option for  our  nation-
building.  With  its   two  levels  of   government,
federalism  combines self-rule with  shared rule. It
allows diverse  communities  to  be  united  in  one
country  without suppressing  their distinctiveness.
Federalism  not  only  gives  room  to  regions   or
provinces to make decisions in their  own areas, but
also allows  them  to achieve  objectives  in  other
areas. And our federal system has proven itself both
flexible and durable, adapting to our changing needs
since Confederation.

   The  Canada of the late 20th century bears little
resemblance to  the Dominion created in 1867. Not in
the territory it  covers, not in its  people, not in
its  economy, not  in  its  culture.  Its  political
institutions  and federal system have been preserved
in some respects, and transformed in others.

   Confederation  was brought  about  in  large part
through a  political bargain between the  leaders of
two societies: a mainly English-and-Protestant  one,
and  a mainly  French-and-Catholic one.  The federal
structure of 1867  recognized Quebec's  right to  be
different within  the economic and  political union.
The  new federal structure,  therefore, incorporated
specific  provisions  to  recognize  the   different
language, culture and civil law tradition of Quebec.
The  initial  bargain  also  took  into account  the
special  financial and transportation  needs of Nova
Scotia and New Brunswick, and  it opened the door to
westward expansion and settlement. 

   The  original  four-province  Canada has  changed
significantly over time to create Canada  as we know
it today. Some claim  that the original bargain  has
not been fully respected. Others, by contrast, think
the  bargain  has not  been sufficiently  updated to
meet changing  needs.  In fact,  the  terms of  that
original  political bargain have  been significantly
altered over the past century and  a quarter through
changes    in   governmental    practice,   judicial
interpretation, and formal constitutional amendment.
Among   amendments,   the   most   far-reaching  has
unquestionably  been  the  Constitution  Act,  1982,
which  included the  Canadian Charter of  Rights and
Freedoms.

   But  there  are compelling  reasons  for  further
constitutional renewal. 

   Aboriginal   Canadians   are   frustrated  by   a
Constitution  that  does not  fully  recognize their
special place in the Canadian society. After a major
step   forward   with   the  entrenchment   in   the
Constitution  of aboriginal  and  treaty  rights  in
1982,   and  successful   amendment  in   1983,  the
frustration of  aboriginal Canadians has  grown from
the  failure  of three  successive  First Ministers'
Conferences  (1984,  1985,  1987)  to  entrench  the
constitutional recognition  of their right  to self-
government. 

   Canada  must  also address  Quebec's  desire  for
recognition  of  its distinct  nature  and  for more
control   over  areas  that  are  inherent  to  that
distinctiveness.  Quebecers  were  promised  that if
they   voted  "no"   in   the  1980   referendum  on
sovereignty,  federalism would be  renewed. Yet, the
constitutional  changes made  in  1982 were  brought
about without the consent  of the Quebec  government
and in  spite of the overwhelming disapproval of the
members of the  National Assembly. Efforts  to bring
Quebec  back  into  Canada's  constitutional  family
under the Meech Lake Accord failed in  1990 when the
amendment as approved by all First Ministers did not
receive   the   subsequent   ratification   of   all
legislatures,  as  required  by  the  constitutional
amending  formula. Both  events left  many Quebecers
feeling rejected by the rest of Canada.

   Many  Canadians, particularly  in the  West,  but
also  in the  Atlantic  provinces,  Ontario and  the
North,  have  become  increasingly  critical  of the
manner  in which  our federal  system  has operated.
They  want  political  institutions  that  are  more
responsive  to their wishes. They want a streamlined
system  of  government  which  minimizes unnecessary
overlap, and institutions which encourage  integrity
rather  than  confrontation.  Canadians  from  every
region want federal institutions that will  hear and
act on the aspirations of all parts of the country.

   Pressures from  within have  been accompanied  by
increasing international  pressures.  Global  forces
are   affecting  the   sovereignty  of   states  and
increasing  their interdependence. Even  the largest
states are proving too small to cope alone with many
of   their  economic,  security   and  environmental
problems. But at the same time, there are world-wide
pressures to decentralize political decision-making.
Canada, like other countries, is tugged in these two
different directions at once.

   Canada must  ensure that  it is equipped  to deal
with the economic challenges of the next century. If
we  are to  maintain our  prosperity, ensure  a high
standard of  living for  our children,  and continue
our  efforts to  reduce  the disparities  that exist
between the  regions of  Canada    one  of the  most
important and enduring principles of Confederation  
we   must  be   prepared  to   work   together  more
harmoniously   and  effectively.  We  must  have  an
economic   union  that  is  both  modern  and  truly
functional.

   The challenge  that faces  us all, as  Canadians,
is  to  build  a  better  federation  for  the  21st
century.  It  will  need  to  be  a federation  that
reinforces and expresses the many-sided character of
Canada  itself: a homeland of many peoples including
the  First   Peoples,  a  land  of   two  linguistic
majorities,  a land of  diverse regions,  a free and
democratic society,  a land  which is  respectful of
differences,  a strong  economic  union,  a  sharing
community  providing  equality  of  opportunity  and
economic security for  all its people, an  important
player on the international stage.

   Federalism  is  the only  political  system  that
will respect these characteristics, all of which are
embedded  in  our  history  and  our  consciousness.
Federalism has important advantages over alternative
forms  of  political  union  or  association.  In  a
country  as vast and varied as Canada, it avoids the
overcentralization  that occurs in  unitary systems.
It  also  avoids  the  disadvantages  of  a   looser
association   of   states,   which   would   be  too
ineffective  to achieve  effective common  action or
the  economic   redistribution   that  can   address
regional disparities.

   The challenge  today is  very much  like that  in
1867     to create  a  federation  which  can  unite
Canadians for the achievement  of common goals while
ensuring  room for  diversity. The  basic objective,
therefore, for a revitalized Canadian  federation is
the effective reconciliation  of unity and diversity
through a harmonious combination of distinct parts.

   Together, Canadians  have created  a country that
is one  of the great  success stories of  the modern
world.  Canada has its  shortcomings, but also great
strengths.   We  can   adapt  and   even,   in  some
fundamental  ways, redesign  our federal  system. We
owe it to ourselves and to  our children to surmount
our  present difficulties  by reconciling  our unity
and diversity in a creative and imaginative way. 

   This  is  Canada's  round. We  must  complete the
process  begun  with  the  1982  amendments  to  the
Constitution,  and prepare  for  the  21st  century,
building   a   framework   that   responds   to  the
aspirations  of  all  Canadians. The  foundation  is
there. Together, we can build a better Canada.



Part I

Shared Citizenship and Diversity

     Canada  has  been  the  inspiration of  my
     life. I  have had before  me...a policy of
     true   Canadianism,  of   moderation,   of
     conciliation.   I    have   followed    it
     consistently since 1896, and  I now appeal
     with  confidence  to  the  whole  Canadian
     people  to  uphold me  in  this policy  of
     sound  Canadianism  which  makes  for  the
     greatness of our country....

                  Sir Wilfrid Laurier, 1911         

   Canadian  citizenship  is  an  emotional  tie,  a
sense  of  shared  values  and  commitments  to  our
country.  Our shared Canadian citizenship provides a
focus  for unity  that  encompasses its  parts,  and
brings our people together. 

   Being Canadian  does not require  that we all  be
alike. Around a core set of shared values,  Canadian
citizenship accommodates a respect of diversity that
enriches us all. Many  Canadians have deep loyalties
to  their own  communities    to  a  language, to  a
region,  to  an  aboriginal  group,  to  a  distinct
culture,  to Quebec  as  a distinct  society, or  to
ethnic  roots. We  may have  other ways  of defining
ourselves     by  gender,  occupation,  religion  or
political party. But woven through all these is  the
sense of  good fortune  which comes from  knowing we
belong to a great country, from being Canadians.

   Canada is  a  country that  believes in  freedom,
dignity  and respect,  equality and  fair treatment,
and an  opportunity to participate. It  is a country
that cares  for the  disadvantaged,  a country  that
prefers  peaceful solutions to disputes. Although we
sometimes lose sight of  this, we do share essential
values as Canadians  from coast to  coast to  coast.
These shared values have been described in many ways
and in many places over the years. The Canadian Bill
of  Rights, now  over 30  years old, was  written to
capture  many  of these  shared  values    those  of
dignity, freedom and respect for the individual.


1.1  Shared Values: The Canadian Identity


   Over  the past  year,  Canadians  have taken  the
opportunity  to speak  their minds  on the  Canadian
identity,  using platforms  which have  included the
Citizens'  Forum  on  Canada's  Future,   provincial
commissions,   and   several   privately   sponsored
surveys.  Most have  spoken  in  favour  of  change,
expressing their frustration and impatience with the
status quo.

   But  many  who  spoke  to  the   Citizens'  Forum
articulated a  strong sense of  a distinct  Canadian
identity which sets us apart from any other country.
They  expressed a sense  of deeply  felt core values
which  they believe  that  all  Canadians  share:  a
belief in  the  need for  equality  and fairness  as
guiding  principles  for our  society,  a belief  in
consultation  and peaceful dialogue,  the importance
of  accommodation  and  tolerance,  a   respect  for
diversity, the  need for compassion  and generosity,
the  value  of  Canada's  natural  beauty,  and  the
importance of a national conscience that spurs us to
make   our   contribution   to  global   peace   and
development.

   Canadians have  told  us  that they  care  deeply
about  their citizenship.  For  many,  not only  the
explorers and pioneers, but also recent newcomers to
this  country, Canada  has  meant personal  freedom,
freedom   from   restrictions   and   hunger.  These
newcomers   were   escaping   old   oppressions  and
searching for  new possibilities. They knew  that in
Canada there is room for everyone to breathe.

   It is  true that  this country  and its  creation
have not taken place without pain and suffering. The
aboriginal peoples, in particular, have  paid a high
price  for other peoples' search for freedom. Canada
has not  always been inclusive,  and many have  been
left  out  of  the  benefits  of  citizenship.  Yet,
despite   these  gaps   which   we   are  only   now
acknowledging and trying  to remedy, Canada  remains
deeply symbolic  of freedom  in its broadest  sense.
Many around  the world  still long  to  come to  our
shores, to share  in what we  have built. People  in
other  nations  continue  to risk  their  lives  and
sacrifice their security  for freedoms that previous
generations have  already guaranteed for us  in this
country.

   What  else does our citizenship mean to  us?  Not
only freedom from oppression, but also  the right to
participate.  Our  democratic  rights  are immensely
important  to  us     so  important   that  we  must
continually expand and improve them. Even in Canada,
democratic rights for  women, for aboriginal peoples
and for certain ethnic  groups have come only  after
long  struggle.  We  must  all  remain committed  to
improving  our democracy  and to  ensuring  that all
members  of  society can  fully  participate  in its
institutions.

   From its beginnings    in democracy,  freedom and
the rule  of  law    Canada  has developed  its  own
unique   way   of   governing,   its   own   special
relationship  between citizen and state. Whether out
of  genius  or necessity,  the architects  of Canada
provided a framework which has allowed us to build a
country on  the basis of what appear increasingly to
be universal values   freedom,  equality, compassion
and community   in a distinctly Canadian way.


1.2  The Rights of Citizenship and the Charter

   In   1982,    the   protection    of   Canadians'
fundamental rights took  a significant step  forward
with  the entrenchment  of the  Canadian Charter  of
Rights  and   Freedoms  in  the   Constitution.  Our
fundamental freedoms were no longer to be found only
in conventions  and  laws  that can  be  changed  by
Parliament or provincial  legislatures. They are now
found   in  the  Constitution  itself.  The  Charter
ensures that laws restrict  freedom as little as  is
reasonably possible.  Freedom and fulfilment  of the
individual  are  limited only  by the  need  for all
individuals  to have the  same freedom  and all that
goes with it.

   The  Charter  contains  protections for  equality
that have struck a special chord with Canadians.

   The  purpose  of  equality  rights,  our  Supreme
Court   has  said,   is   to   remedy   or   prevent
discrimination  against  groups  suffering   social,
political  or legal disadvantage. Many groups in our
society  have faced  or continue to  face formidable
barriers  to  being  included   in  our  society  as
themselves, for  what they are.  The physically  and
mentally   disabled,  aboriginal   peoples,  visible
minorities, official  language  minority groups  and
others  face daily challenges  not always understood
by the rest of  society. Equality aims to  eliminate
the barriers of discrimination. The goal of equality
is not  to achieve  identical treatment;  rather, by
ridding   laws   of   discriminatory   distinctions,
equality rights  aim at equality of  opportunity for
disadvantaged  individuals or  groups. In  fact, the
Supreme  Court has  said that  the  accommodation of
differences is the essence of true equality.

   In  the  Canadian experience,  it  has  not  been
enough  to protect only universal individual rights.
Here,  the  Constitution  and  ordinary   laws  also
protect  other  rights  accorded to  individuals  as
members  of certain communities.  This accommodation
of  both  types  of  rights makes  our  Constitution
unique and reflects  the Canadian value  of equality
that   accommodates   difference.   The   fact  that
community  rights exist alongside  individual rights
in our Constitution goes  to the very heart of  what
Canada is all about.

   The  Government of Canada reaffirms unequivocally
its  support for  rights guaranteed in  the Charter.
However, the Charter does  not guarantee a right  to
property.  It   is,  therefore,  the   view  of  the
Government of  Canada that  the Canadian  Charter of
Rights  and Freedoms should  be amended to guarantee
property rights. 

   The Charter  recognizes that  rights are  subject
to reasonable limits consistent with the values of a
free and democratic society. One person's right  may
occasionally have  to be  limited when  it conflicts
with the  rights and interests  of others or  of the
community as a whole.  The right of free  expression
does  not justify libel  or hate  literature. We ask
the courts  to play  a key  role  in striking  these
kinds of balances.

   Another  source of limitation is found in the use
of an override provision  which was included in  the
Constitution in 1982, when  the Canadian Charter  of
Rights  and Freedoms  was entrenched.  This override
clause    is   commonly    referred   to    as   the
"notwithstanding   clause"   (section   33).    This
provision allows provincial and federal legislatures
to override certain Charter provisions by  an act of
the  legislature,  passed  by  means  of   a  simple
majority. The  override is effective for five years,
at which time it either lapses or  is renewed by the
legislature in question.

   Strong  arguments   have  been  made  that   this
override dilutes  the guarantee of rights  under the
Charter,  since  it  allows  legislatures  to exempt
themselves  from  the scope  of many  (but  not all)
rights  when  they deem  it necessary.  The contrary
argument,  advanced by  those who insisted  upon its
inclusion when  they supported the Charter  in 1982,
is  that  under  our  parliamentary  system  it   is
entirely  appropriate that  elected representatives,
rather  than judges,  should have  the final  say on
public  policy  and   social  needs.  The   override
provision was the result of  a political compromise.
If it did not exist, judges appointed to the Supreme
Court of Canada would be able to determine the scope
of all rights, and any limits to public policy.

   As  a  practical  matter,  the provision  for  an
override will  remain in  the Constitution, but  the
Government of Canada believes that resort to its use
should   be  subject  to  stricter  conditions.  It,
therefore, proposes  that  the votes  necessary  for
Parliament or a provincial legislature to invoke the
override  clause of  the Charter  be changed  from a
simple  majority  to 60  percent of  the  members of
Parliament or the provincial legislature.


1.3  Recognizing Quebec's Distinctiveness


   I have  always  contended  that if  we  could
   agree   to  have   one  government   and  one
   parliament,  legislating  for  the  whole  of
   these peoples, it would be the best...and the
   strongest  system  of  government   we  could
   adopt. But...we found  that such a system was
   impracticable...it would not meet  the assent

   of  the  people  of  Lower  Canada,...with  a
   different language, nationality and  religion
   from  the  majority...it  was found  that any
   proposition which involved the  absorption of
   the individuality of Lower Canada...would not
   be   received  with  favour  by  her  people.
   Therefore, we were forced  to the  conclusion
   that  we must  devise a  system  of union  in
   which  the separate  provincial organizations
   would be in some degree preserved.


                    Sir John A. Macdonald, 1865     

   To  recognize the  distinct character  of  Quebec
society is to acknowledge sociological and political
reality. In fact, the British Parliament  broke with
its  policies in  all  other  colonies  and  granted
Quebec, through the Quebec  Act, 1774, the right  to
preserve  its language,  religion, civil  rights and
seigneurial  system    in short,  its French  way of
life    thereby creating a  distinct society  within
Canada. We have had  that distinct society for  more
than 200 years.

   This  recognition   of  the   distinctiveness  of
Quebec  society,   the  fruit  of   Great  Britain's
political  realism, did  not go  smoothly. In  1867,
after  the  legislative  union  of  Upper  and Lower
Canada  proved  impossible,  and  the  ill-conceived
plans to assimilate French Canadians under the Union
Act, 1840 failed, the  country opted for a  creative
compromise. It adopted a federal  system which could
reconcile  the  provinces'  (particularly  Quebec's)
right  to be  different  while  joining together  to
build    an   economic    union   and    a   dynamic
transcontinental country which was distinct from the
United States.

   In order to achieve this goal, it was decided  to
restore  important elements  from the Quebec  Act at
the time  of Confederation  and provide  the French-
speaking  people of  Quebec  with the  authority  to
preserve  and  promote  their  language  and culture
within the new federation.

   Since   1867,   Canada   has  changed.   Regional
identities have  multiplied  and been  strengthened,
and immigration from around the world has reinforced
Canada's multicultural  character,  both within  and
outside Quebec.

   While  proclaiming its openness to  the forces of
globalization  and  reaffirming  its  willingness to
guarantee  in  the Constitution  the  rights of  its
Anglophone  community and ethnic  minorities, Quebec
is requesting that the Constitution be modernized to
reflect  today's   reality   while  respecting   the
original bargain of Confederation.

   Quebec is  asking that  the Constitution  reflect
Quebec's  distinctiveness as the only society with a
majority French  language and culture in  Canada and
in North America.

   The   Charter  of  Rights  and  Freedoms  already
contains  several  clauses,  notably section  25  on
aboriginal    rights   and   section   27   on   our
multicultural   heritage,   which   recognize    the
importance   of  specific  components   of  Canadian
society. These  clauses are intended  as a guide  to
the interpretation  of the scope and  limitations of
the provisions of the Charter. It is anomalous that,
as it stands, the Charter includes no similar clause
with  respect to Quebec  despite the distinctiveness
of its society.

   The   Government  of  Canada  proposes  that  the
Charter of Rights and Freedoms should be interpreted
in a  manner  consistent with  the preservation  and
promotion  of a  vibrant French-speaking  society in
Quebec that protects  the quality  and influence  of
French as  the expression of its culture  and as the
primary     language    of     work,    instruction,
communication,  commerce and  business in  Quebec. A
definition is proposed in order to  capture the most
evident elements of Quebec's distinctiveness.

   In   addition,  in  recognition  that  linguistic
duality  is a fundamental  characteristic of Canada,
the Government  of Canada believes that  the Charter
should also  be interpreted in  a manner  consistent
with the  preservation of  the existence  of French-
speaking  Canadians and  English-speaking Canadians,
both present in  all parts of Canada, but the former
concentrated  in Quebec and  the latter concentrated
outside Quebec.


1.4  Canada's First Peoples


   Long  before  the  arrival   of  Europeans,   the
territory which  now  makes up  Canada  was home  to
aboriginal peoples. Aboriginal languages, traditions
and cultures grew and developed. The prominent roles
aboriginal  peoples have played  in Canada's history
represent  a   vital  part  of   Canada's  identity.
Increasingly, the sharing of different  perspectives
which stem from the  contact between aboriginal  and
non-aboriginal  people  is  seen  as   a  source  of
richness to be valued, celebrated and preserved in a
spirit of mutual respect.

   Now more than  ever, there is  a recognition  and
an  urgency  to  secure  the  legitimate   place  of
aboriginal peoples within the Canadian  partnership.
Although efforts to resolve the  complex issues have
been marked by many disappointments, progress toward
a  greater  measure   of  mutual  understanding  has
clearly been  made. There is  now an opportunity  to
address  these issues and  to lay a  solid basis for
the kind  of future  to which  the first  peoples of
Canada aspire.

   Like all  Canadians, aboriginal  peoples look  to
the Constitution for a reflection of their vision of
Canada  and for a  definition of  their place within
the Canadian federation. The current  constitutional
process  should create  conditions  that  will  help
aboriginal communities realize their full  potential
within Canada.

Aboriginal peoples must take part in the process

   Section  35.1  of   the  Constitution  Act,  1982
commits governments to the principle that aboriginal
peoples will participate  in discussions relating to
amendments of the provisions of the Constitution  of
Canada which  relate directly  to them.  The current
constitutional  debate will  deal with  matters that
directly affect the aboriginal peoples of Canada. As
the  first  peoples  to  inhabit  Canada, aboriginal
peoples must  have  a  role  in  the  constitutional
process  that  will  determine the  future  of  this
country. 

The right of aboriginal peoples to self-government
should be constitutionally recognized

   Aboriginal  peoples  were  self-governing at  the
time of first contact with European societies. Their
powers   of  self-government,  however,   have  been
seriously  eroded  by   the  encroachment  of   non-
aboriginal  society  and  more  than  a  century  of
paternalism under  the  Indian Act.  Self-government
within the Canadian  federation would eliminate  the
need  for  the  instruments and  methods  of federal
intervention found in the Indian Act. It would be an
important  factor in facilitating the maintenance of
the distinctiveness  and  collective rights  of  the
aboriginal peoples.

   The Inuit  who live  in the more  remote northern
regions of  Canada have devoted much of their effort
in  recent  time to  complex and  comprehensive land
claims negotiations. They have pressed for increased
political autonomy through the government system and
the  entrenchment of their right to self-government.
They  have  also  pressed  for  the  creation  of  a
Territory  of Nunavut  as a  means of  reaching that
objective.

   The  Metis,  for  their   part,  have  played   a
prominent role in the  development of Canada's West.
The Metis have often been characterized as  Canada's
forgotten  people;  the   Government  of  Canada  is
committed  to addressing  the appropriate  roles and
responsibilities  of governments  as they  relate to
the Metis.

   The   provincial   governments   have   generally
supported    the   principle    of   self-government
arrangements for aboriginal Canadians. However,  the
nature  and  extent  of  appropriate  constitutional
recognition  has been  the  subject of  considerable
debate.

   The Government  of Canada  proposes an  amendment
to   the  Constitution   to   entrench   a   general
justiciable  right to aboriginal  self-government in
order to recognize aboriginal peoples' autonomy over
their own affairs within the Canadian federation. As
the right would, in  the end result, be  enforceable
by the  courts, the  Government  of Canada  proposes
that two  important  steps  be taken  to  provide  a
framework for the exercise of this right.

   First,  it  will  be  important  to  express  the
nature of the  right in terms that  guide the courts
toward an interpretation  of self-government that is
consistent with the understanding of both aboriginal
and  non-aboriginal peoples.  For  example,  such  a
right would provide for recognition of the differing
circumstances and needs  of the different aboriginal
peoples in  Canada and would be exercised within the
Canadian constitutional  framework,  subject to  the
Canadian  Charter  of   Rights  and  Freedoms.  Many
federal and provincial  laws of general  application
would also continue to apply.

   Second,  even though  the general  nature of  the
right would  be  described in  the Constitution,  it
will be  essential to  ensure that the  relationship
between aboriginal and non-aboriginal governments is
understood by all. For this reason, and  to ensure a
smooth   transition,   the   Government   of  Canada
proposes:

      that there be a commitment  by governments to
      negotiate self-government agreements with the
      aboriginal peoples;

      that  there  be  regularly   scheduled  First
      Ministers' conferences on this subject;

      that  the general enforceability of the right
      be delayed  for a  period of up  to 10  years
      from the time that the amendment is adopted;

      that,  during this initial  stage, agreements
      reached in negotiations will proceed and that
      agreements     reached      will      receive
      constitutional   protection   as   they   are
      developed.

   After this  period of  transition,  the right  to
self-government  could be  enforced on  its own.  In
practice, however,  it is expected  that the details
of the extent and  nature of aboriginal jurisdiction
will be determined through a process of negotiations
with aboriginal communities.

   Within the  context of  the Canadian  federation,
aboriginal governments would potentially exercise  a
combination of jurisdictions presently exercised  by
the  federal, provincial and  municipal governments,
although many federal and provincial laws of general
application  would continue  to apply.  Depending on
the requirements and circumstances of the aboriginal
group   in  question,  jurisdiction   of  aboriginal
governments could potentially encompass a wide range
of matters including land and resource use, language
and culture, education, policing and  administration
of  justice,  health,  social  development, economic
development and community infrastructure.


A constitutional process on aboriginal matters

   Since it will  not be possible  to deal  with all
the issues  on the aboriginal agenda within the time
allowed for this  process, the Government  of Canada
believes it  would be appropriate to entrench in the
Constitution the  requirement  for a  constitutional
process  to deal with  outstanding aboriginal issues
within an appropriate time. Ministers and aboriginal
leaders should  also use this  forum to monitor  the
progress made in the negotiation  of self-government
agreements.


Representation of aboriginal peoples in the Senate

   Some  countries have  taken  special  measures to
guarantee   that   their   aboriginal   peoples  are
represented in their legislative houses.  Aboriginal
peoples  in  Canada  have  been  chronically  under-
represented in  our  political institutions  at  the
federal level.  This situation is  unacceptable, and
must  be  redressed.   The  Government  of   Canada,
therefore,  proposes that  aboriginal representation
should be guaranteed in a reformed Senate.


1.5  A Constitutional Affirmation of the Canadian
Identity

   A constitution has  two key purposes: one  legal,
one symbolic.  It sets the  rules by which  a people
govern themselves. But it should also convey a sense
of  why  the rules  are  drafted as  they  are, what
values shape them, what purposes and characteristics
identify  the   people  to  whom  they   apply.  All
Canadians   should  be   able   to  relate   to  the
description of the qualities that define the country
to which they are bound by birth or choice.

   As  our Constitution stands, that second symbolic
component  is particularly weak. The preamble to the
Constitution  Act, 1867 contains  an acknowledgement
that four  provinces desired to  come together in  a
federal union  under  the  name of  Canada,  with  a
parliamentary   system  of  government   similar  in
principle  to   that  of  the  United  Kingdom.  The
Canadian  Charter  of  Rights  and  Freedoms,  which
introduces  the Constitution Act of 1982, contains a
single  preambular  clause  stating  that  Canada is
"founded   upon   principles   that   recognize  the
supremacy of God and the rule of  law."  Neither one
of  these preambles contains  a full  description of
who we are as a people and what we aspire to be.

   The Government of  Canada proposes that a "Canada
clause" be  added in the body of the Constitution to
affirm the identity and aspirations of the people of
Canada. The  Government of  Canada believes  that it
would    be    appropriate    for    the   following
characteristics and values to be reflected in such a
statement that would be  entrenched in section 2  of
the Constitution Act, 1867:

      a  federation whose identity  encompasses the
      characteristics  of each  province, territory
      and community;

      the equality of women and men;

      a commitment to fairness,  openness and  full
      participation in Canada's citizenship  by all
      people without regard to race, colour, creed,
      physical  or mental  disability, or  cultural
      background;

      recognition that the aboriginal  peoples were
      historically self-governing,  and recognition
      of their rights within Canada;

      recognition   of   the   responsibility    of
      governments   to   preserve   Canada's    two
      linguistic majorities and minorities;

      the special responsibility borne by Quebec to
      preserve and promote its distinct society;

      the contribution to the building  of a strong
      Canada of  peoples  from  many  cultures  and
      lands;

      the importance of tolerance  for individuals,
      groups and communities;

      a commitment to  the objective of sustainable
      development in recognition of  the importance
      of the land, the  air and the  water and  our

      responsibility  to preserve  and protect  the
      environment for future generations;

      respect for  the rights of  its citizens  and
      constituent communities  as set forth in  the
      Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms;

      the free flow of  people, goods, services and
      capital  throughout  the  Canadian   economic
      union  and  the   principle  of  equality  of
      opportunity throughout Canada;

      a  commitment   to  the   well-being  of  all
      Canadians;

      a  commitment to  a democratic  parliamentary
      system of government;

      the  balance  that  is   especially  Canadian
      between  personal and  collective freedom  on
      the  one  hand and,  on  the other  hand, the
      personal  and collective  responsibility that
      we all share with each other.

Proposals

   1.  Reaffirming  the   rights  and   freedoms  of
citizens.  The Government  of  Canada reaffirms  the
basic rights set out in the Charter as a fundamental
feature of the Canadian Constitution. The Government
of  Canada proposes  that  the Canadian  Charter  of
Rights and Freedoms be amended to guarantee property
rights.  The Government  of Canada  further proposes
that  the   votes  necessary  for  Parliament  or  a
provincial   legislature  to  invoke   the  override
(section 33) be changed from a simple majority to 60
percent  of   the  members  of  Parliament   or  the
provincial legislature.

   2.  Recognition of  Quebec's distinctiveness  and
Canada's  linguistic  duality.  The  Government   of
Canada proposes  that a section  be included in  the
Charter stating  that  the  Charter  of  Rights  and
Freedoms shall be interpreted in a manner consistent
with the recognition of Quebec as a distinct society
within Canada. The section would read:

25.1  (                     1                     )
   This Charter  shall be  interpreted in a  manner
   consistent with

      (a) the preservation and promotion  of Quebec
      as a distinct society within Canada; and

      (b)  the  preservation  of  the  existence of
      French-speaking Canadians,  primarily located
      in Quebec but also present throughout Canada,
      and  English-speaking   Canadians,  primarily
      located  outside Quebec  but also  present in
      Quebec.

   (                      2                      )
      For the purposes of subsection (1), "distinct
      society", in relation to Quebec, includes

      (a) a French-speaking majority;
      (b) a unique culture; and 
      (c) a civil law tradition.

(See  the Annex at  the end  of Part I  for excerpts
from the Charter: present sections 1, 25, 27, 28 and
31 and proposed section 25.1.)

   3.  Aboriginal    participation    in     current
constitutional  deliberations.  The  Government   of
Canada  is  committed  to  ensuring  that aboriginal
peoples participate  in  the current  constitutional
deliberations. 

   4.  Aboriginal  self-government.  The  Government
of Canada proposes an amendment to the  Constitution
to  entrench   a   general  justiciable   right   to
aboriginal   self-government  within   the  Canadian
federation and  subject to  the Canadian Charter  of
Rights and Freedoms, with the nature of the right to
self-government   described  so  as   to  facilitate
interpretation of that right by the courts. In order
to  allow  an  opportunity  for  the  Government  of
Canada,  the governments  of the  provinces and  the
territories, and  aboriginal  peoples to  come to  a
common understanding of the  content of this  right,
its enforceability  would be delayed for a period of
up to 10 years.  The Special Joint Committee  should
examine the  broad  parameters of  the  right to  be
entrenched in the Constitution and the jurisdictions
that aboriginal governments would exercise.

   5.  Aboriginal   constitutional   process.    The
Government of Canada proposes the  entrenchment of a
constitutional process to address aboriginal matters
that   are   not   dealt   with   in   the   current
constitutional deliberations and to monitor progress
made   in   the   negotiations   of  self-government
agreements.

   6.  Representation of  aboriginal peoples  in the
Senate.  The  Government  of  Canada  proposes  that
aboriginal representation should  be guaranteed in a
reformed Senate.

   7.  A  Canada  clause in  the  Constitution.  The
Government of Canada proposes that a "Canada clause"
that acknowledges who we are as a people, and who we
aspire  to be,  be  entrenched in  section 2  of the
Constitution  Act,  1867. The  Government  of Canada
believes  that  it  would  be  appropriate  for  the
following characteristics and values to be reflected
in such a statement:


      a  federation whose identity  encompasses the
      characteristics  of each  province, territory
      and community;
      the equality of women and men;

      a commitment  to fairness,  openness and full
      participation in Canada's citizenship  by all
      people without regard to race, colour, creed,
      physical  or mental  disability, or  cultural
      background;

      recognition that the aboriginal  peoples were
      historically self-governing, and  recognition
      of their rights within Canada;

      recognition   of   the   responsibility    of
      governments   to   preserve   Canada's    two
      linguistic majorities and minorities;

      the special responsibility borne by Quebec to
      preserve and promote its distinct society;
      
      the contribution to the building of a  strong
      Canada  of  peoples from  many  cultures  and
      lands;

      the importance of tolerance  for individuals,
      groups and communities;

      a  commitment to the objective of sustainable
      development in recognition of  the importance
      of the  land, the air  and the  water and our
      responsibility  to preserve  and protect  the
      environment for future generations;

      respect for the  rights of  its citizens  and
      constituent communities as set  forth in  the
      Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms;

      the free flow  of people, goods, services and
      capital  throughout  the  Canadian   economic
      union   and  the  principle  of  equality  of
      opportunity throughout Canada;

      a  commitment   to  the  well-being  of   all
      Canadians;

      a  commitment to  a democratic  parliamentary
      system of government;

      the  balance  that  is   especially  Canadian
      between  personal and  collective freedom  on
      the  one  hand and,  on  the other  hand, the
      personal  and collective  responsibility that
      we all share with each other.

 Annex

 Recognizing  Quebec's  Distinctiveness  in   the
 Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms

 The following is the present sections 1, 25, 27,
 28 and 31 and the proposed section 25.1:

 1.    The   Canadian   Charter   of  Rights   and
       Freedoms   guarantees    the   rights   and
       freedoms  set out  in  it  subject only  to
       such reasonable  limits  prescribed by  law
       as can be demonstrably  justified in a free
       and democratic society.

 25.   The guarantee  in this  Charter of  certain
       rights and freedoms  shall not be construed
       so  as to  abrogate  or  derogate from  any
       aboriginal,   treaty  or  other  rights  or
       freedoms  that  pertain  to the  aboriginal
       peoples of Canada including

    (a)   any rights  or freedoms  that have  been
          recognized by the Royal Proclamation  of
          October 7, 1763; and

    (b)   any rights  or freedoms  that now  exist
          by way of land claims agreements or  may
          be so acquired. (92)

 25.1  (                   1                   )
    This Charter shall be interpreted in a manner
    consistent with 

       (a)   the  preservation  and  promotion  of
       Quebec  as   a   distinct  society   within
       Canada; and

       (b) the  preservation of  the existence  of
       French-speaking    Canadians,     primarily
       located   in   Quebec   but  also   present
       throughout  Canada,  and   English-speaking
       Canadians,   primarily   located    outside
       Quebec but also present in Quebec.

    (2)   For  the  purposes  of  subsection  (1),
          "distinct  society",   in  relation   to
          Quebec, includes

       (a) a French-speaking majority;
       (b) a unique culture; and
       (c) a civil law tradition.

 27.   This  Charter  shall be  interpreted  in  a
       manner  consistent  with  the  preservation
       and   enhancement   of   the  multicultural
       heritage of Canadians.

 28.   Notwithstanding anything  in this  Charter,
       the  rights and freedoms referred  to in it
       are guaranteed  equally to  male and female
       persons.

 31.   Nothing  in   this   Charter  extends   the
       legislative   powers   of   any   body   or
       authority.



Part II

Responsive Institutions for
a Modern Canada


   Canada's   political    institutions   must    be
revitalized. One of the important conclusions of the
Citizens'   Forum  on   Canada's  Future   was  that
Canadians   are  increasingly  concerned  about  the
effectiveness, fairness and respon-siveness of those
institutions. 

   Our   objective  must  be   to  build   upon  our
parliamentary   traditions   to   produce   improved
political institutions.  These institutions must  be
democratic;  they must  be effective;  they must  be
seen  by Canadians across  the country  to represent
them fairly  and responsively; and they must reflect
the  diversity  of peoples  and opinions  within the
country. 

2.1  House of Commons Reform

   Many  Canadians have  become  concerned  that our
parliamentary  system  is too  partisan: that  it is
weighed  too heavily  toward  conflict, rather  than
toward  cooperation.   The  abrasive  character   of
adversarial   debate  in   the  House   of  Commons,
particularly  in  Question  Period,  has  undermined
parliamentary decorum and the public's confidence in
parliamentary  institutions   and  the  ability   of
elected  members   to  focus  on   their  legitimate
representational  requirements. A loss of confidence
in  the  way  the country's  political  business  is
conducted has  even led to demands  for the transfer
of legislative power  out of the hands of members of
Parliament,  through  the  use  of  referendums  and
plebiscites.

   The Government  is confident  that Canadians  are
best  served by  the  democratic  election of  their
representatives on a regular basis, to act on  their
behalf in a way that  reflects both the interests of
the voters  and the  integrity  of the  people  they
elect. This  is a stable, reasonable and responsible
system. The first priority must be to reform  rather
than by-pass the House of Commons.

   While  the  reform  of the  House  of  Commons is
important, it is not primarily a matter for federal-
provincial   deliberations  on  amendments   to  the
Constitution.  Therefore, the Government  of Canada,
in  cooperation  with all  parties in  the  House of
Commons, will explore ways  and means to  strengthen

the  representational and legislative  capacities of
individual  members of Parliament.  Canadians expect
their MPs  to have a  reasonable measure of  freedom
from  party discipline  to  allow them  to represent
constituency and  regional concerns,  and to  have a
meaningful  impact  on  legislation.  The Government
will,  therefore, develop  proposals to  enable more
free votes.

   Modification   of   the   conventions  for   non-
confidence votes to allow more free votes would be a
very important reform. (The loss of a non-confidence
vote  leads  to  defeat  of  a  government  and  its
resignation.)  Such conventions  can be relaxed  and
party    discipline    reduced    without    serious
consequences   for    responsible    or    effective
government.  In  addition  to  taxation  and  supply
matters, confidence  votes might be  restricted to a
limited number of bills  central to the government's
program  which would  be  explicitly  identified  as
confidence  measures. In  this way,  there  would be
more legislation subjected to "free votes" (in which
individual   MPs   can   better   represent    their
constituents by choosing how  to vote without having
to worry that the government may fall).

   Other proposals to be considered include:

      providing   more  House   time  and   greater
      priority for private members' bills;

      referring  bills to  parliamentary committees
      at an earlier stage   after first reading and
      before  approval in  principle at  the second
      reading to  give those committees more  scope
      in amending bills; and 

      requiring  that  vacancies in  the  House  of
      Commons be filled within a  specified period,
      thereby respecting the needs  of constituents
      for representation.

   The  Government   will  also   explore  how   the
openness and visibility of parliamentary  procedures
might  be   improved.  At   present,  much   of  the
independent  work   by  MPs  on   behalf  of   their
constituents takes  place in caucus and  in Cabinet.
Procedures  which  allow  considerable  loosening of
party  discipline to bring  the actions  of MPs into
the open  would help to strengthen the confidence of
Canadians    in   the   responsiveness    of   their
representatives.

2.2  Senate Reform

   In  virtually   every  federation,   the  federal
legislature  is  composed  of  two  houses.  One  is
usually  a  directly  elected  house,  such  as  the
Canadian House  of Commons, in  which representation
is based on population. The second house is designed
to  give particular weight  to regional and minority
views in federal policy-making. In many federations,
the second  house is also  elected, in some  manner,
giving it a claim to democratic legitimacy. 

   Canada's   non-elected  Senate  is  unique  among
federations.  Not  surprisingly,  there  is  a  long
history in  Canada  of pressure  for Senate  reform.
This  pressure  has  become  particularly  acute  in
recent  years as both  the Western  and the Atlantic
provinces have voiced  irritation that the  House of
Commons is dominated by the electoral  weight of the
more populous provinces.

   The impetus  for  Senate reform  stems first  and
foremost from  the conviction held by many Canadians
that  federal  decision-making  is  not sufficiently
responsive  to  regional  diversity.  More recently,
support   for  Senate  reform   has  gathered  added
momentum   from  public  dissatisfaction   with  the
Senate's   non-elected  character.  It   has  become
impossible to reconcile an unelected Senate blocking
the legislative will of the elected House of Commons
with the demand by Canadians for more democratic and
responsive government.

   The status quo  of federal appointment  cannot be
sustained.  Neither is  abolition  of  the Senate  a
practical   option  at   this   time.  Every   other
successful federation  has  a representative  second
chamber in the federal legislature.  Abolition would
not address  chronic  concerns  about  the  lack  of
effective regional representation.


An Elected Senate

   The principle that Senators  be elected  directly
by  the  people reflects  the broad  consensus among
Senate  reform proposals that have emerged since the
adoption of the Constitution Act in 1982. Therefore,
the Government of Canada proposes a directly elected
Senate,   designed   both   to   improve    regional
representation  and  to  increase  responsiveness to
individuals  by  strengthening  the  power   of  the
Canadian  electorate through  changes to  reform the
Senate. 

   An  elected Senate  could  assume many  and quite
varied forms. Within  this framework, three  closely
related  aspects must be  considered: (a) the method
of  election of  Senators, (b)  the  distribution of
Senate seats, and (c) the powers of the Senate. 

   The  Government  of  Canada  proposes   that  the
timing  of Senate  elections  should  coincide  with
elections to  the House of  Commons. On this  basis,
the dissolution of the House of  Commons would imply
the dissolution  of the Senate. This would emphasize
the federal character of the Senate,  and would also
recognize the fact that the House of Commons and the
Senate share a common legislative agenda. 


a)  Method of Election

   Other  federal   systems   with  elected   second
chambers  provide  a   wide  variety  of   means  of
selecting  their senators,  ranging  from  the  same
system we use to elect MPs to  the House of Commons,
to   more    complex    systems   of    proportional
representation. The Special Joint Committee is asked
to consider various options for electing senators on
the basis of the following principles:

      The method of election should give expression
      to  the  social  diversity  of  the  Canadian
      population,  keeping in  mind the  history of
      the inadequate  political  representation  of
      women, aboriginal peoples and ethnic groups.

      As suggested  by the Royal Commission  on the
      Economic Union and Development  Prospects for
      Canada  (the Macdonald Commission),  the size
      of  Senate  constituencies  should  be  large
      enough    to    allow    for     proportional
      representation and, in the  larger provinces,
      numerous  enough   to   represent   different
      regions within the province. 


b)  Distribution of Senate Seats

   Current provincial  representation in  the Senate
displays  an outdated  historical  logic  and is  no
longer  acceptable: Ontario and  Quebec each have 24
seats, Nova Scotia and  New Brunswick each have  10,
the  four Western  provinces  and Newfoundland  each
have 6, Prince  Edward Island has  4, and the  Yukon
and Northwest Territories have  1 each, for a  total
of 104  seats. The distribution is anomalous in many
ways. New  Brunswick and  Nova Scotia,  for example,
have greater representation than Alberta and British
Columbia,  even  though  the latter  provinces  have
populations which are  three to five times  greater.
Ontario has greater per capita representation in the
Senate than have either Alberta or British Columbia.

   Although  the  original  distribution  of  Senate
seats was based on  the equal representation of  the
three regions of Canada at the time of Confederation
  the Maritimes, Quebec and Ontario   the reality of
contemporary Canadian politics is that provinces and
territories, and not regions, are basic to our sense
of community and identity.

   Provinces  should  therefore  replace regions  as
the   basic   units   for   Senate   representation.
Furthermore,   it   is   time  to   reconsider   the
distribution of Senate  seats so that  the provinces
are more equitably represented. The  distribution of
Senate  seats is a key issue    all reform proposals
have dealt with it in some form or another.

   The Canada  West Foundation  has received  strong
support  for  its position  that  an  elected Senate
should   provide    the    provinces   with    equal
representation. In 1981, the Foundation declared:

   For political  purposes,  Canada  is  divided
   into a  number of regions  that go under  the
   label  of  "provinces",  and  this  political
   reality should  be  reflected  in  the  equal
   representation   in   the   Senate   of   all
   provinces....    Other     federal    systems
   (Australia,  the United  States, Switzerland)
   possess  upper  chambers  whose  members  are
   drawn in equal  numbers from each constituent
   unit,   regardless  of  the   differences  in
   population.    These   systems    accept   as

   legitimate    the   dual   nature    of   the
   representation  that is required in a federal
   system: the representation of citizens in the
   national legislative process  on the basis of
   both population and region.

   Others   have   rejected   equal   representation
because of the very large  differences in provincial
populations.  This latter position  was supported by
the  Special Joint Committee  of the  Senate and the
House of Commons  on Senate Reform  in 1984, in  the
following terms:

   We therefore concluded that,  while providing
   for substantial  over-representation  of  the
   less  populous provinces and  territories, we
   should  propose a distribution  that reflects
   the Canadian  reality  more  accurately  than
   simple numerical equality can do.


   The final  communique   of  the  June  1990  First
Ministers' Conference on the Constitution  indicated
the agreement  of all 11  governments that the  less
populous  provinces and  territories should  be more
equitably represented in  the Senate. Therefore, the
Government of Canada  proposes that the  composition
of  the  Senate  provide  for  much  more  equitable
provincial and  territorial  representation than  at
present. The Government  of Canada asks the  Special
Joint  Committee to  recommend the  most appropriate
number and  distribution of Senate seats to ensure a
much  more  equitable  provincial  and   territorial
representation while taking account of:

      Canada's linguistic duality;

      the  nearly 80-fold difference  in provincial
      populations;

      the small number of provinces in Canada;

      the need for aboriginal representation; and
      the  method  of  election  of  the  House  of
      Commons.

   In so  doing, the  Committee may wish  to examine
the experience  of  other federal  systems  such  as
Germany, which provides three seats in the Bundesrat
for  small  L nder   (the  German  version  of   our
provinces), four seats for mid-size L nder, and five
seats  for the largest  L nder. It may  also wish to
review  the specific  proposals  of the  Canada West
Foundation for equal representation and those of the
Macdonald  Royal   Commission   which  proposed   an
equitable Senate.

c)  Powers of the Senate

   The Government  of Canada's  underlying principle
in respect  of the appropriate powers for a reformed
Senate  is that the  House of  Commons should remain
the primary  legislative body for Canada. The Senate
should  not,  therefore,  be a  confidence  chamber:
legislative defeat  in the Senate should not lead to
the  resignation of  the government.  The Australian
experience in  this respect has  led to  instability
and  a constitutional  crisis and  must be  avoided.
However,  an  elected  upper  house  must have  real
powers  to be  effective and  provide  the necessary
regional    balance   to    Canada's   Parliamentary
institutions.

   For  this  reason,  the   Government  of   Canada
believes that,  as  a  general rule,  in  order  for
measures to become law, approval of  both the Senate
and the House  of Commons should  be required as  at
present.

   For  matters   of  language   and  culture,   the
Government of  Canada proposes that  the Senate also
have a double majority special voting rule. This was
recommended  by the Alberta Legislative Committee in
1983 and the Government of Newfoundland and Labrador
in 1989.

   The  Senate  should,  however,  not  be  able  to
override the House of Commons in relation to matters
of  particular national importance, such as national
defence  and international  issues. In  these cases,
the Government  of Canada  proposes that the  Senate
have  a six-month  suspensive  veto,  following  the
expiry  of  which the  House  of  Commons  would  be
required to  repass the legislation for it to become
law.

   Since  the  Senate  would  not  be  a  confidence
chamber,  the  Government proposes  that  the Senate
have   no   legislative   role   in    relation   to
appropriation  bills  and  measures to  raise  funds
including borrowing authorities.

   Only the  House of  Commons will be  a confidence
chamber under these proposals.

   It is the  view of the  Government of Canada that
a reformed Senate should also  continue the practice
of undertaking special inquiries  as it has done  in
the  past (for  example, the  Report of  the Special
Senate  Committee on  Poverty, "Poverty  in Canada";
and  the Report of  the Special  Senate Committee on
Retirement Age Policies, "Retirement without Tears")
to provide the Government  with valuable input  into
issues  of  public  policy.  Also,  Senators  should
continue to be allowed to sit in the federal Cabinet
to  ensure adequate  regional representation  in the
Cabinet.

   The  overall objective of Senate reform should be
one  of  balance:  creating an  elected  Senate with
sufficient  powers   and  legitimacy  to   meet  the
challenge  of effective representation, while at the
same  time maintaining  the present  relationship of
the Cabinet  to the House  of Commons. This  balance
can  be found.  In this  respect, the  Government of
Canada expects that the Special Joint Committee will
ensure  that  Senate   reform  issues  receive  full
consideration in its hearings across the country.


Ratification of Appointments

   Canadians want  a  more open  form of  government
and more responsive  institutions generally, with an
increased capacity  for  federal decision-making  to
respond to regional interests and  sensitivities. In
making  appointments   to   regulatory  boards   and
agencies,   the   Government   of   Canada   has   a
responsibility    to    ensure    the    appropriate
representation   of   women,   visible   minorities,
language  groups,   aboriginal   peoples,  and   the
disabled,  as  well  as  to   ensure  that  regional
interests  are  represented.  For this  reason,  the
Government of Canada proposes that the Senate should
have a  mandate  to ratify  the  appointment of  the
Governor of  the Bank of Canada and the appointments
of the heads of national cultural institutions, such
as   the  Canadian  Broadcasting   Corporation,  the
National  Film  Board,  the  National  Library,  the
National  Archives,   the   national  museums,   the
Canadian Film  Development  Corporation, the  Canada
Council, and  the National Arts  Centre; as well  as
the heads of regulatory boards and agencies, such as
the   National    Energy    Board,   the    National
Transportation Agency, the Canadian  Radio-televison
and  Telecommunications Commission,  the Immigration
and  Refugee  Board,   and  the  proposed   Canadian
Environmental Assessment Agency.


2.3  The Supreme Court of Canada

   The Supreme  Court of Canada  plays an  important
constitutional role with respect to disputes between
federal   and   provincial   governments   over  the
distribution of  powers under the  Constitution, and
with respect to the adjudication of cases  involving
the  Canadian Charter  of  Rights  and Freedoms.  At
present, the  Court  is the  creature  of a  federal
statute   which   specifies   its   composition  and
jurisdiction. The Supreme Court Act  ensures that at
least three  of  the  nine  Supreme  Court  justices
appointed are from the Quebec bar, the only province
with a civil law system. Three justices usually come
from  Ontario,  two  from  the  West  and  one  from
Atlantic Canada. There is, currently, no requirement
for  the federal  government  to  consult  with  the
provinces.

   The Meech  Lake Accord  had proposed to  entrench
the Supreme  Court and its  existing composition  in
the  Constitution. Such  an amendment  would require
the  unanimous consent of  the Parliament  of Canada
and all  10 provincial legislatures.  The Government
continues  to  support   these  Meech  Lake   Accord
proposals and would be prepared to recommend them if
it  were   found  desirable  to  proceed   with  any
unanimity items in the final package. 

   Amending  the  Constitution  to  provide   for  a
provincial and territorial  role in the  appointment
process  does not require  unanimity. Therefore, the
Government  of  Canada  proposes  a   constitutional
amendment  through  which  Supreme  Court  vacancies
would be dealt with in the following manner:

      the  Minister   of  Justice   would  ask  the
      appropriate  Minister(s)   of   Justice   and
      Attorney(s)  General to submit a list of five

      nominees within 90 days; and

      the   Government  of  Canada   would  appoint
      justice(s)  acceptable to  the Queen's  Privy
      Council of Canada from those lists.

If names are not submitted within the specified time
period,  the Government of  Canada would  be able to
proceed on  its  own  to nominate  a  Supreme  Court
justice.


2.4  The Constitutional Amending Formula

   The formula for  amending the Constitution itself
is   a  key  issue  on  the  constitutional  agenda.
Conferences of  First Ministers were held  from 1927
to 1981   for over 50 years   to find a procedure to
amend   Canada's   Constitution   and   permit   its
patriation.  Full agreement eluded  First Ministers.
Agreement among the Prime Minister and nine premiers
was  achieved  in  November  1981  on  a  patriation
package  that included  an amendment  procedure, but
the  Government  of  Quebec    representing  over  a
quarter of  the  population of  Canada    was not  a
party  to the  agreement. The  National Assembly  of
Quebec subsequently rejected the agreement. Although
now  legally bound  by the  Constitution  Act, 1982,
Quebec continues  to challenge that  Act's political
legitimacy  because  it  altered  the constitutional
powers of  the Quebec National Assembly  without the
latter's consent. 

   It was  to address  this issue of  legitimacy and
to ensure  that Quebec once  again became an  active
partner   in   pursuing   Canada's    constitutional
evolution that the Meech Lake Accord was negotiated.
The Meech Lake Accord would have made two changes to
the amending formula now in place:

      the unanimous  support of  Parliament and the
      legislative  assemblies of all  the provinces
      would have been  required for amendment  of a
      number of additional  matters, such as Senate
      reform  and the  creation  of  new provinces,
      which   currently  require  the   consent  of
      Parliament and two thirds of  the legislative
      assemblies for amendment; and

      compensation  would have  been provided  to a
      province  opting   out   of   any   amendment
      transferring provincial legislative powers to
      Parliament.

   These  two  changes  to  the  existing  amendment
procedure  were unanimously  supported by  all First
Ministers in April 1987 and in June 1990.

   Following the failure of  the Meech Lake  Accord,
the  Government  established  the   Beaudoin-Edwards
Special Joint  Committee to review  the issue.  That
Committee  recommended a new  amending formula which
would require  the  consent of  Parliament  and  the
legislative  assemblies of Ontario, Quebec, at least
two  Atlantic  provinces and  at  least  two Western
provinces, representing at  least 50 percent  of the
population   of  these   regions,  for   most  major
amendments.   This  recommendation  has   failed  to
attract  the   unanimous  support  which   would  be
required to change the amending formula.

   Most  of the constitutional  proposals set out in
this document   including  Senate reform   could  be
enacted   with  the   support  of   seven  provinces
representing 50  percent of the  population. This is
not    the   case   with   the   amending   formula.
Nevertheless, the Government of Canada  continues to
support   the   proposal   for   amending   Canada's
Constitution included in the Meech  Lake Accord. The
Government  would be  prepared to proceed  with this
proposal if  a  consensus  on this  matter  were  to
develop over the course of the next five months;  if
the    accession   of   existing    territories   to
provincehood  were to  proceed on  the basis  of the
current  amending formula;  and  if  it  were  found
desirable  to proceed ultimately  with any unanimity
items in the final package.


Proposals

   8.  House of  Commons. The  Government of  Canada
commits itself to a process of further parliamentary
reform to give individual MPs more free votes and to
reduce the application of votes of confidence.

   9.  Principles  of  Senate  reform:  an  elected,
effective and more  equitable Senate. The Government
of Canada proposes that: 

      the Senate be directly elected; 

      Senate  elections coincide with  elections to
      the House of Commons;

      the Senate's  composition  provide  for  much
      more  equitable  provincial  and  territorial
      representation than at present; 

      the  House  of  Commons  remain  the  primary
      legislative body;

      as a general rule,  in order for measures  to
      become law, approval  of both the Senate  and
      the House of Commons should be required as at
      present;

      for matters  of  language  and  culture,  the
      Senate  would  also  have  a double  majority
      special voting rule;

      for matters  of national  importance, such as
      national defence  and  international  issues,
      the Senate would have a  six-month suspensive
      veto.  Following  expiry  of  the  suspensive
      veto, the House  of Commons would be required
      to  repass the legislation  for it  to become
      law;

      since the Senate is not a confidence chamber,
      the Senate would  have no legislative role in
      relation to appropriation bills  and measures
      to   raise    funds    including    borrowing
      authorities;

      guaranteed  representation  be  provided  for
      aboriginal Canadians in the Senate;

      the  Senate  continue to  have  a mandate  to
      conduct  special  inquiries  into  issues  of
      public policy.

   10.  Details of Senate reform. The  Government of
Canada  proposes that the Special Joint Committee of
Parliament consider the following issues:

      the form of direct election to the Senate;

      the  appropriate number  and distribution  of
      Senate seats;

      in consultation with the  aboriginal peoples,
      the appropriate  representation  of  Canada's
      First Peoples.

   11.  Senate  Ratification   of  Appointments   to
Regulatory  Boards and  Agencies. The  Government of
Canada proposes that the  Senate be given a  mandate
to  ratify the  appointment of  the Governor  of the
Bank of Canada and the appointments  of the heads of
national cultural institutions, such as the Canadian
Broadcasting  Corporation, the National  Film Board,
the  National  Library, the  National  Archives, the
national  museums,  the  Canadian  Film  Development
Corporation,  the Canada  Council  and the  National
Arts  Centre,  as well  as the  heads  of regulatory
boards  and agencies  such  as the  National  Energy
Board,  the  National  Transportation  Agency,   the
Canadian  Radio-television  and   Telecommunications
Commission,  the Immigration and  Refugee Board, and
the   proposed  Canadian   Environmental  Assessment
Agency. 

   12.  Appointments  to   the   Supreme  Court   of
Canada. The  Government of  Canada will  introduce a
constitutional  amendment to provide  for a role for
the provinces and the  territories in Supreme  Court
appointments whereby appointments  would be made  by
the  federal  government  from  lists   of  nominees
submitted by provincial and territorial governments,
the  individual  appointed being  acceptable  to the
Queen's Privy Council of Canada.
  
   In addition,  the Government  of Canada  would be
prepared  to proceed  with the  entrenchment  in the
Constitution   of   the   Supreme   Court   and  its
composition  if it  were found desirable  to proceed
with any unanimity items in the final package.

   13.  The  Constitutional  Amending  Formula.  The
Government  of Canada would  be prepared  to proceed
with changes to the amending formula as specified in
the Meech Lake Accord if a consensus on  this matter
were  to  develop;  if  the  accession  of  existing
territories to  provincehood were to proceed  on the
basis  of the  current amending  formula; and  if it
were found desirable to  proceed ultimately with any
items  requiring  unanimous  consent  in  the  final
package.
  


Part III

Preparing for a
more Prosperous Future


   The  Canadian federation has proven very flexible
in adapting  to change. Nevertheless, it  is time to
consider  some improvements  to  the  way we  govern
ourselves  and to  the way governments  manage their
affairs so we  may better reflect  the realities  of
modern-day Canada. 

   Many  elements of  the Canadian  federation  need
not be changed. The federal government will continue
to ensure that  all Canadians have  equal access  to
the entitlements of their citizenship. This includes
the  redistribution  of  resources  in the  form  of
equalization payments   an obligation of the federal
government   written  into  the  Constitution  under
section 36. Section 36 also commits both the federal
and  provincial   governments   to   promote   equal
opportunities  for the  well-being of  Canadians, to
further  economic development, to reduce disparities
in  opportunity, and  to  provide  essential  public
services of reasonable quality to all Canadians.

   Also  important  to  Canadians   is  the   income
security  system.  By   making  direct  payments  to
Canadians,  such as pensions  and family allowances,
and by supporting the welfare system managed by  the
provinces, the  federal government plays  a critical
role in  ensuring the  well-being of all  Canadians.
The Government of Canada recognizes that its ability
to  mitigate   the  effects  of   regional  economic
disparities  through   these   instruments   is   of
particular  importance   to  Atlantic  Canada.   The
federal government will continue to promote economic
development  initiatives across the  country so that
Canadians  in all  regions have  the  opportunity to
live and  work within their own  communities, and to
maintain  a satisfying  quality  of  life for  their
families.

   The   Government  of  Canada  will  maintain  its
ability  to  ensure that  all Canadians  continue to
receive  the   benefits  of  Canadian   citizenship,
regardless  of where they  live or what  they do. We
are bound together as a society by our belief in the
fundamental obligation to share our wealth with  our
fellow  Canadians.   The  federal  government   will
continue to support this principle in the future, as
it does today.

   However, the Government of Canada  is of the view
that  change is  required in  a number  of important
areas to  ensure Canada's  future prosperity and  to
serve Canadians better. Specifically, the Government
will address issues related to the management of the
economic  union, the  distribution  of  some  powers
between the federal  and provincial governments, and
the way  governments  work together.  The  following
criteria underlie the proposals for  change in these
areas:  

      Canadian  goals. The federal  government must
      be able to  express the Canadian identity and
      achieve common Canadian goals.

      Respect for diversity. Federalism  reconciles
      the  need for  certain  strong  common powers
      with the ability to  accommodate and  reflect
      different  regional needs  and objectives  in
      other   areas.  These  different   needs  and
      objectives   should   be   pursued   by   the
      provinces.

      Simplicity.  Government  should  be  kept  as
      close to the people as feasible. This is what
      has been described  in the European Community
      as the  principle  of  "subsidiarity."    The
      federal  government should be  involved where
      there is a need  for a common policy or where
      its assumption of the  responsibilities would
      enhance efficiency.

      Shared responsibility.  There  are  areas  in
      which  neither the federal government nor the
      provincial  governments  can  act   alone  to
      achieve shared goals. In these cases, a joint
      federal-provincial    effort    to     manage
      interdependence  in  the  interests   of  all
      Canadians is essential.

3.1  A Stronger Economic Union

   One  of  the   principal  driving  forces  behind
Confederation more than a century ago was the vision
that for certain matters  more could be accomplished
together  than apart:   that Canada  could provide a
better future for its  citizens as one country.  And
in that  one  country  there could  be  respect  for
diversity   embodied   in   strong   provinces.  The
provinces that joined together  to form that country
formed  a political  union,  but also  an  important
economic union. 

   The world  has changed  a great deal  since 1867.
Canada  faces a  rapidly  changing and  increasingly
competitive  international  economy.  Canada  is not
insulated from  these forces. To  ensure our  future
well-being   and   prosperity,   we   must    create
opportunities for  our economy to adjust and grow in
a manner which will enhance our  capacity to compete
in  the  global world  economy. It  is  evident that
individual Canadians will be key to this response as
entrepreneurship, knowledge and technology determine
the cutting edge of competitiveness. 

   Some  things  have  not  changed since  1867.  In
fact,  the  benefits  of economic  integration  that
brought us together are even more  compelling now in
the face  of  recent  and  ongoing  continental  and
global economic  change. And,  the ultimate  goal of
any country is still, and always will be, to provide
a better future for its citizens  and their children
by ensuring their economic security and well-being.

   The prosperity that Canadians enjoy today is  the
proof  of the  benefits that are  attainable. Canada
has the second-highest standard  of living among the
major industrialized  nations.  From 1961  to  1990,
Canada's rate  of economic growth was second only to
Japan's among the  world's seven largest  economies.
Over  the same  period, Canada  has had  the fastest
rate of growth of employment   of jobs created.

   But these  figures mask  some real challenges  to
our  prosperity:   the  rate of  growth  of Canada's
productivity has slowed  in recent years;  one-third
of  young Canadians drop  out without even finishing
high   school;  illiteracy   rates  are   high;  and
investment in research  and development by  Canadian
industry is lower  than in other  leading industrial
countries. Our past performance  is no guarantee for
the future. Canada must ensure that it has the tools
in  place to  ensure  that  future generations  also
enjoy the  high  standard  of living  that  we  have
today. To  prosper we must  change. We must  improve
the  way  we   manage  our  economic  problems   and
opportunities.  We   must  do   a   better  job   of
integrating economic activity and our concerns about
the environment.

   Canada could  not  continue to  provide the  same
level of  economic  benefits without  the  political
union   of   its   provinces.   Effective   economic
integration requires  political  integration.  There
are  real benefits  from having  access to  a larger
market, guaranteed  access to inputs,  access to new
technology and the ability to share risk.   

   Federalism  has allowed Canadians to benefit from
an economic and  political union which has  provided
not only for a  common currency and banking  system,
the mobility  of factors  of production  between the
provinces, and  a common financial  market, but also
for a  highly developed network of  social programs,
and a regime to share the country's wealth among its
regions and people. At the same time, federalism has
accommodated different regional needs and objectives
in other matters.

   While the  process of  amending the  Constitution
may  seem somewhat removed  from the  daily lives of
Canadians  who are concerned  about their  jobs, and
jobs for  their children,  this process provides  an
opportunity  to  take  actions  to   strengthen  our
economic union. We must enhance the operation of our
internal market. We  must improve the  harmonization
and  coordination of economic  policies. Governments
must work  together better on behalf of Canadians to
ensure a better future for all Canadians.


Enhancing Trade and Mobility within Canada

   A  strong and well-functioning domestic market is
essential  to  the   well-being  of  all  Canadians.
Existing barriers to the mobility of  people, goods,
services  and  capital  within  Canada  impede trade
among  the  provinces  and  limit  the  mobility  of
individual  Canadians. The inability of Canadians to
benefit  fully from  the advantages  of an  internal
market weakens their  ability to compete effectively
in the global economy.

   The  Constitution Act,  1867 contains  a  section
(section  121)  referred to  as  the  "common market
clause," which  was  put in  place  at the  time  of
Confederation to prohibit barriers to trade. Section
121 stipulates that goods from any province shall be
admitted  freely  into  the  other  provinces.  This
clause does  not  reflect the  realities of  today's
marketplace.  It does  not mention  the  mobility of
capital or of services. It does not  provide for the
full mobility of people which not  only is important
to the  operation of  the economic  union, but  is a
basic right of all Canadians. 

   In order  to ensure  that people, goods,  capital
and services  can  move freely  within  Canada,  the
Government of  Canada proposes  that section 121  of
the  Constitution  be   modernized  to  enhance  the
mobility  of  persons, capital,  services  and goods
within Canada  by prohibiting any laws,  programs or
practices of  the federal or  provincial governments
that  constitute  barriers or  restrictions  to such
mobility. This would provide all Canadians  with the
right to pursue the  livelihood of their choice  and
economic opportunities wherever they choose to do so
in Canada. The Government of Canada further proposes
that the  new section 121  would come into  force on
July  1, 1995,  in order  to allow  for a  period of
transition  and  adjustment  to  the  elimination of
these barriers. 

   This proposal  should not  delay current  efforts
to  eliminate  interprovincial  barriers  to  trade.
Federal  and  provincial  governments  should pursue
their efforts to dismantle these barriers. A process
should be  adopted as soon  as possible which  would
commit governments  to  eliminating barriers  within
the internal market at the earliest possible date.

   There may be  some situations in which overriding
interests    or   considerations    would   preclude
governments   from  eliminating   a  barrier.     In
recognition  of  this,  the  amendment  proposed  to
section 121  allows  for exceptions  for reasons  of
national   interest,   and   would  not   apply   to
legislation  promoting   regional   development   or
equalization.  The  Special  Joint  Committee should
consider  whether other  exceptions to  the proposed
section 121 would be appropriate. 

Strengthening the Economic Union

   The proposed amendment to  section 121 would  not
eliminate all problems  in Canada's internal market.
Governments would  still have to  play a  leadership
role  to  ensure  the  effective  operation  of  the
internal market and a strong economic union.

   Both federal  and provincial  governments have  a
role to  play  in  the management  of  the  economic
union.  Accordingly,  while  the  federal government
should have  the necessary  authority to  manage the
economic   union,  that  authority   should  not  be
unfettered.   The  challenge   is   one  of   shared
responsibility;    the    response    is    one   of
intergovernmental collaboration and consultation.

   The  Government  of  Canada, therefore,  proposes
that   the  Constitution   be  amended   to  provide
Parliament with  a new  power to  make laws  for the
efficient functioning of  the economic union.  Since
the management of  the economic union is  an area of
shared  responsibility,  federal  legislation  under
this new  power  could not  be  enacted without  the
approval  of  at   least  seven  of   the  provinces
representing 50 percent of the population. 

   Once approved,  the law  would be binding  on all
provinces  and the  federal  government. However,  a
province which did not  support the legislation  (up
to three  according  to the  decision-making  rules)
could opt out of the federal law  for three years by
passing a  resolution with the support of 60 percent
of the  members of the  provincial legislature.  The
federal law would then  not apply in that  province.
The  Government of Canada  proposes that the Special
Joint Committee should consider whether  the opting-
out provision should be renewable.

   Since this  new power  would provide a  mechanism
for shared management of  the economic union by  the
federal and provincial governments, its entrenchment
would allow for the transfer and/or decentralization
of  powers  and  responsibilities  in  a  number  of
specific  sectors to bring decision-making closer to
the people.

   This new  power will help  Canada prepare for the
future and  face the challenges of the 21st century.
It will provide a mechanism for the establishment of
Canadian objectives, norms and standards in a number
of areas essential to the efficient operation of the
economic union.

   Similarly,   this   new   power  can   also  help
strengthen Canada's financial sector, to enhance the
functioning of the economic union. The Government of
Canada will work actively with the provinces in this
area to  clarify responsibilities. In  this respect,
the Government  intends  to  address  the  issue  of
overlap and  duplication in the regulation  of trust
companies. The  federal  government will  also  work
closely with the provinces to develop more efficient
and   better   coordinated   corporate    securities
regulation   which   will   be   essential   in   an
international    environment    where    unnecessary
duplication  risks business going elsewhere. It will
also  be   important  for  Canada  to  have  a  more
effective  presence in international  groups dealing
with securities matters.


Harmonizing Economic Policies

   The effective  fiscal policy  coordination of all
Canadian governments  is important to  the long-term
growth  prospects of  Canada's  economy  and to  the
future prosperity of all Canadians.

   Federal and  provincial  governments each  pursue
their own  spending  and  tax  policies  to  improve
standards of  living, to reduce unemployment  and to
control inflation. Since the end of the Second World
War, provincial spending and  tax policies and their
impact on the management of the  economic union have
increased  dramatically. This has increased the risk
that the tax and spending policies  of the provinces
and those of the  federal government may operate  at
cross purposes. This conflict  can reduce the growth
of the  economy and affect  an individual's standard
of living. Such divergence in federal and provincial
policies also complicates the task of maintaining an
effective national  monetary  policy, which  is  the
other  major  instrument  used to  achieve  economic
objectives.

   Through   its   participation   in  international
organizations  like  the  Organization  for Economic
Cooperation   and   Development   (OECD)   and   the
International  Monetary   Fund   (IMF),  Canada   is
committed to coordinating its economic policies with
those of the other large industrialized countries to
strengthen  the growth  of  the  world economy  from
which all of our individual economies benefit. While
such coordination  is important  to provide  a sound
basis   for  long-term   prosperity,  there   is  no
mechanism within  Canada to ensure that the economic
policies  of the federal  and provincial governments
are coordinated.

   Fiscal  coordination would be greatly facilitated
by  making the budget  processes of  the federal and
provincial   governments  more  open   and  visible.
Certainly  this has  been  the  experience of  other
federations which have developed procedures to share
information  and consult  with  each  other  in  the
development   of   their   annual   budgets  without
compromising  necessary   safeguards   against   the
improper exploitation of the process. The Government
of Canada,  therefore, proposes to  develop with the
provinces an annual timetable to allow for more open
and  visible  federal  and  provincial budget-making
processes that would include:

      a relatively fixed annual budget cycle;
      
      a fixed annual schedule of Finance Ministers'
      meetings;
      
      the publication by the 11 governments of pre-
      budget economic/fiscal outlooks; and
      common accounting conventions.

   The  Government of  Canada proposes  to  develop,
with   the  provinces,  guidelines  to  improve  the
coordination   of    fiscal    policies   and    the
harmonization  of  fiscal  policies  with   Canada's
monetary  policy.  Once  developed,  the  guidelines
would be  set in federal  legislation under the  new
economic union power. Accordingly, these  guidelines
would require the approval of at least seven of  the
provinces representing 50 percent of the population,
and up to three provinces could opt out.

   The  Government   of  Canada   also  proposes  to
discuss with the provinces  the establishment of  an
independent  agency  to  monitor  and  evaluate  the
macroeconomic policies of the federal and provincial
governments. Such an agency could perform a role for
Canadian   governments   not   dissimilar   to  that
performed by the OECD and the IMF for their members.
The    monitoring   function   would    furnish   an
indispensable  information   base   that  would   be
publicly  available  to assist  the  task  of policy
coordination and harmonization.

   In  order to  improve  the  harmonization between
monetary  policy  and  the  fiscal  policies  of the
different  levels of  government, the  Government of
Canada proposes  to amend the Bank of  Canada Act to
make  it clear that  the mandate  of the Bank  is to
achieve  and  preserve  price stability.  To  ensure
regional representation on the Board of Directors of
the Bank of Canada, the Government  will solicit the
views of provincial and territorial  governments and
consult with them before  making appointments to the
Board.  In  addition,  the  Government  proposes  to
create  regional consultative  panels to  advise the
Directors   of  the   Bank   on  regional   economic
conditions.  The  Government will  also  solicit the
views of provincial and territorial governments with
respect to  the membership of  the regional  panels.
Moreover, as discussed above, the appointment of the
Governor of the  Bank of Canada would  be subject to
Senate ratification.

3.2  Serving Canadians Better

   In a  number of areas,  Canadians would be better
served if decision-making were brought closer to the
people. Federalism  provides  governments with  this
ability  to  pursue  different  regional  needs  and
objectives  in  some  areas  while  pursuing  common
objectives in others.

   The  Government of  Canada is  of  the  view that
there is a need to adjust the distribution of powers
between   federal  and  provincial   governments  in
certain areas and to clarify the responsibilities of
each  level in  other areas.  There are  areas which
were not mentioned in  the 1867 Constitution. Others
have been the subject of debate between  governments
for many years. It  is important for governments  to
respect     each    others'     jurisdictions    and
responsibilities even  if few areas can be perfectly
compartmentalized  in  a  rapidly  changing   global
environment.  To serve Canadians better and to avoid
costly  and  disruptive  overlap  and   duplication,
governments  must  better  respect the  division  of
responsibilities.  This is particularly  critical in
areas   where  both   the  federal   and  provincial
governments have roles to play.

   Change is not  proposed for the  sake of  change:
sectors that  function well should not  be adjusted.
Change  is only  proposed when  it will  improve the
service or program Canadians receive.

   There  are various  avenues  available  to adjust
and    to    clarify    responsibilities        some
constitutional, some administrative. In cases  where
jurisdictions are not  defined, the Constitution can
be  amended to  make them  explicit. In  areas where
both levels  of government have  a legitimate  role,
the  different  responsibilities  of the  levels  of
government can be clarified in bilateral agreements.
Such   agreements   can   be   entrenched   in   the
Constitution  to  guarantee  their  permanence.  All
these  options will be contemplated in the proposals
that follow.

1.  Labour Market Training

   Labour market training is key to Canada's  future
prosperity. Training is also important to a worker's
mobility  within the  country. It  is essential  for
businesses  that  depend  increasingly on  a  highly
skilled  labour   force  to  gain  and   maintain  a
competitive  edge.   Therefore,   the  federal   and
provincial governments, employers and employees  all
have a direct  interest in this  field. In fact,  an
enhanced   private  sector  role   in  training  and
standard-setting will be critical to Canada's future
competitiveness.   In  the  future,   training  will
require full partnership of  all the players in  the
economy.

   Skills  training   for  the   labour  market   is
intimately related to  the educational system, which
is an area of  exclusive provincial jurisdiction. It
is also a program area that should be delivered on a
local  basis. The  Government of  Canada, therefore,
proposes  a  constitutional  amendment  to recognize
explicitly that labour market training is an area of
exclusive provincial jurisdiction. 

   Given  the  importance  of  training to  Canada's
international competitiveness and future prosperity,
leadership in the area of skills standards should be
exercised  jointly  by  the  federal  and provincial
governments  through  the  new  head  of  power  for
managing the economic  union. Setting standards  and
objectives  will   be   essential  to   develop   an
internationally  competitive  labour  force  and  to
preserve  and  enhance the  mobility  of individuals
within Canada. 


2.  Immigration

   Immigration is  one of  the few  areas of  formal
concurrent   jurisdiction   between   federal    and
provincial  governments  which  is  defined  in  the
Constitution. Provision for concurrency was put into
the Constitution  Act,  1867, with  the  stipulation
that the federal government had paramountcy in cases
of conflict. 

   The    Government   of   Canada   must   maintain
responsibility   for   providing   citizenship   and
citizenship services, and for establishing the total
number  of  immigrants  and national  standards  and
objectives  related  to  immigration.  Within   this
framework,  the Government of  Canada is prepared to
negotiate with  all  provinces bilateral  agreements
appropriate  to  the   circumstances  of  each.   An
agreement which respects both federal and provincial
interests  has already  been concluded  with Quebec,
and negotiations are under way with other provincial
governments. In addition, to ensure greater security
for  these  agreements,  the  Government  of  Canada
proposes to constitutionalize the agreement with the
province of Quebec,  and any  other agreements  that
are negotiated.


3.  Culture

   Canada's national  identity  reflects the  coming
together  of rich cultural  histories and traditions
rooted  in the  very history  and beginnings  of the
Canadian people.

   The  duality  of Canada's  cultural  milieux  has
contributed to the country's richness and diversity.
Our identity is enriched  by two very different  but
intensely    vibrant    cultural    realities    and
strengthened greatly by the aboriginal cultures that
preceded them and by  the many diverse multicultural
experiences  and traditions  more recently  added to
the cultural reality of Canada.

   Our challenge,  therefore, is to  ensure, on  the
one hand, the  maintenance of important  Canada-wide
institutions that help  us promote our  identity. On
the  other  hand,  Canada's  cultural  policies  and
jurisdictions must offer the flexibility of ensuring
that the roots of culture are  enhanced and enriched
and  that there are  no  impediments  to  provincial
governments  playing the roles they deem appropriate
in the cultural field.

   Views on  the appropriate  roles for  governments
in  this  area  may  vary  widely,  and the  current
sharing  of  responsibilities  between  federal  and
provincial  governments may  be appropriate  in most
provinces. However, language and culture have always
been the clearest expression of  the distinctiveness
of Quebec  society. And the Government of Quebec, as
the   only  senior   government  in   North  America
representing  a  population  which  is predominantly
French-speaking, has  special  responsibilities  for
the  preservation and promotion of Quebec's cultural
identity  because  of  the  intense  pressures  that
emerge  from the  simple fact  that, of  276 million
people in North America, only 7  million have French
as a mother tongue.

   The  Government   of   Canada  will,   therefore,
negotiate  with the  provinces, upon  their request,
agreements    appropriate    to    the    particular
circumstances of each province to define clearly the
role of each level of government. Where appropriate,
such  agreements would be  constitutionalized. While
these   agreements  will  recognize   the  important
community  dimension  of  culture,  and  the special
responsibilities of the Government of Quebec in this
area,  the  Government   of  Canada  will   maintain
responsibility  for   existing   Canadian   cultural
institutions  (such  as  the CBC/Radio  Canada,  the
national  museums,  the  National  Film  Board,  the
Canada  Council, the National  Library, the National
Archives,  Telefilm and  the  National Arts  Centre)
that allow  for the expression and  dissemination of
Canada's identity both within Canada and abroad.

4.  Broadcasting

   Broadcasting  is an  area of  importance both  to
Canada's   identity  and  to   cultural  expression.
Accountability   for  regulating   the  broadcasting
sector is appropriately located at the federal level
because activities in the field cross provincial and
international  boundaries.  Nevertheless,  there  is
room to enhance  the role of  the provinces in  this
field and eliminate some irritants.

   The  Government  of  Canada, therefore,  proposes
to:

   1. consult with the provinces on the issuance of 
   new licences;
   
   2. provide provincial governments and their agents 
   with the opportunity to evolve into full public 
   broadcasting undertakings with varied programming, 
   subject to CRTC regulation;

   3. further regionalize the operations of the CRTC 
   and expand the roles of its regional offices;

   4. allow for provincial participation in the 
   nomination of regional commissioners of the CRTC.

5.  Federal Residual Power

   The "Peace, Order and Good Government clause"  of
section 91 of the  Constitution Act, 1867 gives  the
Parliament of  Canada the authority to  legislate in
three  areas:    matters  of  national  emergencies;
matters   of  national  dimensions;  and  all  other
matters    not   specifically   assigned    in   the
Constitution. The  Government of Canada  proposes to
reserve  to  itself   the  Peace,  Order  and   Good
Government  clause to maintain its authority to deal
with national matters  and emergencies. However, the
Government of  Canada is prepared to transfer to the
provinces  authority  for  non-national  matters not
specifically  assigned  to  the  federal  government
under  the   Constitution  or  by  virtue  of  court
decisions.

6.  Federal Declaratory Power

   The declaratory  power (section 92(10)(c) of  the
Constitution   Act,   1867)   enables   the  federal
government  to shift legislative  jurisdiction for a
"work" from  the provinces to the federal government
by declaring it to  be for the general  advantage of
Canada.   The  Government  of   Canada  proposes  an
amendment  to  the  Constitution  to  eliminate  the
declaratory   power.   Its   elimination   from  the
Constitution  would  remove  a  potential   federal-
provincial irritant. 


7.  Recognizing Areas of Provincial Jurisdictions

   There  are  a  number of  sectors which  are more
properly the responsibility of the provinces whether
or  not  they  are  specifically  assigned   in  the
Constitution.  The federal government is involved in
some   of   these  sectors   because   of   its  own
responsibilities,  for  example,  for  international
affairs,  for native  people  and  for research  and
development. In other areas of  exclusive provincial
jurisdiction, the federal government has  intervened
in the past primarily through the use of the federal
spending power. 

   The  Government  is  committed  to  ensuring  the
preservation  of  Canada's  existing  research   and
development    capacity    and    to     maintaining
constitutional  obligations  for  international  and
native   affairs.  Within  this   framework,  it  is
prepared to recognize  the exclusive jurisdiction of
the provinces in the following areas and to withdraw
from these  fields in a  manner appropriate to  each
sector and respectful of the provinces' leadership:

      tourism
      forestry
      mining
      recreation
      housing
      municipal/urban affairs 


8.  Streamlining Government

   The  growing  complexity  of society  both within
Canada and  around the  world means  that it  is not
possible  to allocate  all  functions  perfectly  to
different levels  of government. There  are areas in
which  governments  must  work together  to  achieve
common objectives. In other  areas, there is a  need
to  eliminate  unnecessary  overlap  and duplication
resulting from the expanding role of governments and
to reduce the cost of government where possible.

   Concern   with   overlap   and   duplication   in
government programs and  regulations dates at  least
as far  back as  the 1937  Rowell-Sirois Commission.
Progress  in  rationalizing  and  coordinating   the
programs of  the two senior levels of government has
been  made  through  exercises  such  as   the  1978
federal-provincial review  and  the 1984-85  federal
Ministerial Task Force on Program Review.

   However,   there  remains  significant  room  for
improvement in rationalizing and harmonizing federal
and  provincial programs.  To  avoid  the costs  and
disruptions resulting from overlap and  duplication,
governments    must   respect   the    division   of
responsibilities  and work better  together in areas
of shared jurisdiction.

   The objective  is the  elimination of unnecessary
costs to individuals, to  the private sector and  to
governments. Costs arise from public confusion about
which level  of government delivers what service and
from the administrative  burden to clients who  must
deal  with multiple  levels of government  (and, for
example,  fill out  multiple sets  of forms)  or who
must   find  ways   of  dealing   with  incompatible
requirements  of  different  governments.   Economic
costs occur where federal and  provincial objectives
are inconsistent,  with a resulting reduction in the
effectiveness of both sets of programs. 


Administrative Delegation

   Administrative  delegation   is  one   instrument
which   can    result    in   significant    program
rationalization    and    harmonization.     Through
administrative    delegation,   the    federal   and
provincial governments  could  transfer programs  or
activities to  each other, to  local governments, or
to the private sector.

   With administrative  delegation from  the federal
to other levels of government,  for example, program
standards  would  still   be  set  by   the  federal
government  but program  delivery could  vary within
general    guidelines    from    jurisdiction     to
jurisdiction. In this way, administrative delegation
would  provide  an  opportunity to  improve  program
efficiency and responsiveness.

   Administrative  delegation  is  already  used  to
harmonize  and  rationalize  federal  and provincial
programs in some areas. For instance, most provinces
delegate to the federal government the authority  to
collect personal  and business  income tax  on their
behalf. Federal  consumer  products inspectors  help
enforce   provincial    food    standards    through
administrative  agreements.  Management  of   inland
fisheries has been delegated to most provinces under
administrative agreements. 


Legislative Delegation

   Another  option  for  rationalizing  federal  and
provincial authority is legislative delegation. This
option  would  require  a  constitutional  amendment
which   would   permit   federal   and    provincial
governments to delegate to  each other the authority
to  legislate  in  a  given  field.  It would  allow
governments    to   adapt   quickly    to   changing
circumstances  or respond to  particular conditions.
Legislative delegation  would not alter  the current
division  of   constitutional   powers,  since   the
delegating government would retain the  authority to
revoke any legislation.

   This  mechanism  could be  very  flexible  in its
application. Governments  could  delegate a  general
area  of authority with broad scope for legislation,
or  a very  narrow area  with specified  constraints
that would  nonetheless provide for  some regulatory
flexibility.  Delegation  arrangements  need  not be
identical with all provinces. Some provinces  may be
in  a  better position  to enact  and  implement new
authorities than others.  Also, if provinces  choose
not  to  exercise  delegated  authorities,   federal
legislation and regulations would continue to apply.
It is  for these reasons  that the  Beaudoin-Edwards
Joint  Parliamentary  Committee,  reporting  in June
1991,  strongly  recommended  such  a constitutional
amendment.

   The  Government  of  Canada, therefore,  supports
the insertion in the Constitution of  a provision to
enable  the  delegation  of  legislative   authority
between the two levels of government with the mutual
consent of the legislative bodies involved.


Candidates for Streamlining Proposals

   There   are   many   areas   where  the   federal
government  is  prepared  to  delegate  its  program
delivery responsibilities in order to provide better
service  to  Canadians  and/or  reduce  costs. Other
areas  would  be  candidates for  rationalizing  the
involvement of both levels of government. Therefore,
the  Government  of  Canada  proposes  the following
areas as  candidates for early  discussion with  the
provinces   for  either   administrative  delegation
and/or legislative delegation as appropriate in each
individual case:

       drug prosecutions
       wildlife conservation and protection
       transportation of dangerous goods
       soil and water conservation
       ferry services
       small craft harbours
       some aspects of financial sector regulation 
       some aspects of bankruptcy law
       some aspects of unfair trade practices
       inspection programs

   Inspection   programs   are   undertaken   in   a
multitude   of   areas,   including   food,   drugs,
fisheries, labour operations, weights and  measures,
and transportation. In general, specific  inspection
activities can be rationalized under either level of
government   in  areas   of   mutual  interest   and
involvement. In some cases, delegation to provincial
governments  makes sense while,  in other  areas, an
expanded federal presence  is warranted. The federal
government  is  prepared  to  discuss administrative
delegation arrangements in any inspection  area with
a view to reducing costs  both to governments and to
the private sector.


3.3  The Federal Spending Power
   Providing   Canadians  with  the  best  level  of
service possible  also requires that  the Government
address  concerns  about  the  use  of  the  federal
spending    power    in    areas    of    provincial
responsibility.   Federal   involvement   must   not
undermine the possibility for provincial governments
to carry  out  the  policies desired  by  their  own
electorates  within   the   areas  of   jurisdiction
assigned to them. 

   The  federal spending power is not defined in the
Constitution, but it has been confirmed very clearly
by  the  Supreme  Court.  It  is  inferred from  the
federal government's comprehensive taxing power  and
its control over "the public debt and property."

   In practice, the spending  power encompasses  the
expenditures  of the  federal government in  a broad
range of areas and in  a broad number of forms  (for
example,  Canada-wide shared-cost programs  with the
provinces,  such as health  care; bilateral federal-
provincial agreements, such as regional  development
agreements; or federal payments to organizations and
individuals, such as Canada Council grants).

   The exercise of the federal spending  power gives
rise to  serious and often  impassioned debate. Many
Canadians  regard it  as essential  for establishing
and  maintaining  basic  Canadian  norms  in  social
policy. Its  proponents   including many in Atlantic
Canada   see  it, therefore, as a  means of bringing
about   a  fair  distribution  of  the  benefits  of
economic union, of dealing with regional disparities
and of maintaining an instrument for binding  Canada
together as a country.  Others, by contrast, believe
that where the spending power  has been used by  the
federal government to gain  entry into an  exclusive
provincial  domain,  its  exercise  is illegitimate.
Traditionally,   Quebec's   requests   for   federal
withdrawal from certain fields have centred on areas
of  exclusive provincial  jurisdiction in  which the
federal government  had intruded through the  use of
its spending power. Critics also tend  to argue that
where  the powers  of  the  federal  and  provincial
governments overlap, the use of the federal spending
power gives rise  to duplication, inefficiency, lack
of accountability and over-government.

   Some  of these are valid concerns, as the federal
government  has   acknowledged   in   constitutional
discussions since 1969. To address them, both levels
of government need to establish a new set  of ground
rules for  the  exercise  of  the  federal  spending
power.  The provincial  governments  must  be  given
safeguards  that  alleviate  their  concerns   about
federal intervention in their areas of jurisdiction.
The  federal  government must  have  safeguards that
protect its ability to  ensure that the  consistency
and  availability  of  public  services  across  the
country are not jeopardized. 

   The Government of  Canada must  have the  ability
to continue making  transfer payments to  individual
Canadians and to organizations. The  Government also
affirms its intention to  continue making grants  to
provincial  governments  on the  basis  of bilateral
negotiations,  especially in  the field  of regional
development.  Continued cooperation  with provincial
governments is essential  to fulfilling the  federal
responsibility for promoting equal opportunities for
the  well-being  of  Canadians, and  for  furthering
economic   development  to  reduce   disparities  in
opportunities.

   In response to  criticisms about the  use of  the
federal  spending  power  in  fields   of  exclusive
provincial jurisdiction,  the  Government of  Canada
commits  itself not  to  introduce  new  Canada-wide
shared-cost programs  and  conditional transfers  in
areas  of exclusive provincial  jurisdiction without
the   approval   of   at   least   seven   provinces
representing  50  percent  of  the  population. This
provision would  be entrenched in  the Constitution.
The  constitutional amendment would also provide for
reasonable compensation to provinces that choose not
to participate in the  new Canada-wide programs  but
which  establish  their  own  programs  meeting  the
objectives  of  the  new  program.  Through  such  a
process it should  be possible at the  outset of any
new  program to  establish  both the  mechanisms  to
ensure that Canadians receive the  appropriate level
of service  and  the terms  and  conditions for  any
change in federal financing for any program approved
in this manner.


3.4  Working Together

   Effective  intergovernmental  collaboration  will
be essential  to Canada's future well-being. In many
areas,  there  are  Canadian  objectives   that  the
Government  of  Canada cannot  achieve  alone:   the
provinces have  important roles  to  play. In  other
areas,  there  is  a  need  to  collaborate  and  to
coordinate  different policies and  programs. Partly
as  a  consequence,  there are  currently  over  500
intergovernmental  conferences and meetings  a year,
in  addition   to   high-profile  First   Ministers'
Conferences, which touch upon the  respon-sibilities
and interests  of both  the  federal and  provincial
governments.

   All  federations  have   found  it  necessary  to
create  processes  and  mechanisms  to   manage  the
interdependence of  governments,  for, in  practice,
federal and provincial functions cannot be placed in
watertight compartments. In other federations  which
have    combined    parliamentary    and     federal
institutions, this process of collaboration has been
achieved  primarily  through  consultation   between
federal and provincial executives. 

   Our    vast    network    of    intergovernmental
consultation  has  significant  achievements  to its
credit,  including the establishment  of Canada-wide
shared-cost programs  and the social  safety net  of
which Canadians  are justifiably proud.  However, it
has not  proven  to  be an  effective  mechanism  of
collaboration    there are  no decision-making rules
and there is no formal process  of consultations. At
the same time, the current system has attracted much
public  criticism because  of the  closed nature  of
many inter-governmental discussions. These  problems
take on added significance  now that governments are
more interdependent than ever before. 

   The success of Canada's efforts to modernize  our
federation and  the future  health  of the  economic
union will depend on  the establishment of effective
means  for governments  to  work together.  We  must
harness the existing system of  executive federalism
to improve  it  and  make  it more  open  to  public
scrutiny and input.

   The  Government  of  Canada, therefore,  proposes
the  establishment of  a Council  of the  Federation
composed  of  federal,  provincial  and  territorial
governments that would meet  to decide on issues  of
intergovernmental  coordination  and  collaboration.
The  result would be  a more  publicly visible, more
productive  and  less  confrontational  process   of
intergovernmental  relations. The Council  would not
be another layer of government. The objective of the
Council would  be to improve  the management of  the
interdependence of  government  actions inherent  in
our   federal  system.   Given  the   importance  of
intergovernmental  collaboration, the  Government of
Canada is  prepared to entrench  the Council in  the
Constitution.

   The Council  of  the  Federation would  have  the
following mandate: 

   1. to vote on proposed federal legislation under 
   the proposed new head of power to enhance the 
   functioning of the Canadian economic union;

   2. to vote on common guidelines for fiscal 
   harmonization and coordination, and make decisions
   on improved processes for future collaboration in 
   this area;

   3. to make decisions on the use of the federal 
   spending power on new Canada-wide shared-cost 
   programs and conditional transfers in areas of 
   exclusive provincial jurisdiction.

   All decisions  of the  Council of  the Federation
would require the approval of the federal government
and  of  at least  seven  provinces  representing 50
percent of the population.

   This   Council   must  be   designed   in   close
collaboration  with   provincial   and   territorial
governments to  maximize  the effectiveness  of  the
process. The Special Joint  Committee could use  the
following illustrative membership and procedures for
such a Council  in its consideration  and discussion
of  this  proposal  with   Canadians  and  with  the
provincial and territorial governments:

      the Council would  be composed of ministerial
      representatives  from the  federal government
      and each provincial government;  governmental
      representatives  could vary depending  on the
      nature   of  the   issues  being   discussed;
      territorial representatives would participate
      as non-voting members;

      representatives  would act  on behalf  of the
      government  they represent,  and each  of the
      provincial governments would have one vote;

      the Council would have no permanent  staff or
      headquarters.  It  would  be  served  by  the
      current resources  of  the  Intergovernmental
      Secretariat  and  would  meet  on a  rotating
      basis  in  existing  federal  and  provincial
      facilities.


Proposals

   14.  Broadening  s.   121,   the  common   market
clause.  The  Government  of  Canada  proposes  that
section 121 of the Constitution Act, 1867 be amended
to read as follows:

   121.   (1)Canada  is  an  economic  union  within
          which   persons,   goods,   services   and
          capital  may move freely  without barriers
          or  restrictions  based  on  provincial or
          territorial boundaries.

       (2)Neither the  Parliament  or Government  of
       Canada nor the legislatures or governments of
       the  provinces  shall  by  law   or  practice
       contravene   the   principle   expressed   in
       subsection (1).


       (3)Subsection (2) does not render invalid

          (a)  a law  of  the  Parliament of  Canada
          enacted  to  further  the  principles   of
          equalization or regional development; 

          (b)  a  law of  a  provincial  legislature
          enacted in  relation to  the reduction  of
          economic   disparities   between   regions
          wholly  within a  province  that does  not
          create  barriers or restrictions  that are
          more  onerous  in  relation  to   persons,
          goods, services  or  capital from  outside
          the province than it  does in relation  to
          persons,  goods, services or  capital from
          a region within the province; or

          (c)  a law of the  Parliament of Canada or
          of the legislature of  a province that has
          been  declared by Parliament  to be in the
          national interest.

       (4)A declaration referred to in paragraph (3)
       (c)  shall  have  no   effect  unless  it  is
       approved by the governments of at least  two-
       thirds  of the  provinces that  have, in  the
       aggregate,  according  to  the  then   latest
       general census,  at least  50 percent of  the
       population of all the provinces.


       (5)This section shall come into force on July
       1, 1995.

   15.  Power  to  Manage the  Economic  Union.  The
Government  of  Canada proposes  that  the following
section  be  added  to  the Constitution  Act,  1867
immediately after section 91:

   91A.   (1)Without  altering  any  other authority
          of the Parliament of  Canada to make laws,
          the  Parliament of Canada  may exclusively
          make laws in relation  to any matter  that
          it  declares  to  be   for  the  efficient
          functioning of the economic union.

       (2)An Act  of the Parliament  of Canada  made
       under  this  section  shall  have  no  effect
       unless  it is approved  by the governments of
       at  least two  thirds of  the  provinces that
       have, in the aggregate, according to the then
       latest general census, at least 50 percent of
       the population of all the provinces.

       (3)The  legislative assembly of  any province
       that is  not  among the  provinces that  have
       approved an Act of  the Parliament of  Canada
       under subsection (2) may expressly declare by
       resolution supported  by  60 percent  of  its
       members that  the Act of Parliament  does not
       apply in the province.

       (4)A declaration  made  under subsection  (3)
       shall cease  to have effect three years after
       it is made or on such earlier  date as may be
       specified in the declaration.

   The Government of  Canada also proposes  that the
Special Joint Committee consider whether the opting-
out provision should be renewable.

   16.  Harmonization  of   economic  policies.  The
Government of Canada  proposes to develop,  with the
provinces,  an annual  timetable to  allow for  more
open and visible budget-making processes.

   The  Government  of  Canada proposes  to develop,
with  the  provinces,   guidelines  to  improve  the
coordination   of    fiscal    policies   and    the
harmonization  of  fiscal  policies  with   Canada's
monetary  policy.  Once  approved,  these guidelines
would  be set in  federal legislation  under the new
economic union power. Accordingly, these  guidelines
would require the approval of at least seven  of the
provinces representing 50 percent of the population,
and up to three provinces could opt out.

   The Government also proposes to discuss  with the
provinces the establishment of an independent agency
to monitor  and evaluate the  macroeconomic policies
of the federal and provincial governments. 

   17.  Reforms   to  the   Bank  of   Canada.   The
Government of Canada proposes  to amend the Bank  of
Canada Act to make it clear that  the mandate of the
Bank is  to achieve and preserve price stability. To
ensure  regional  representation  on  the  Board  of
Directors of the Bank of Canada, the Government will
solicit  the  views  of  provincial  and territorial
governments  and  consult  with them  before  making
appointments   to  the   Board.  In   addition,  the
Government proposes to create regional  consultative
panels  to  advise  the  Directors  of  the Bank  on
regional economic  conditions.  The Government  will
also solicit the views of provincial and territorial
governments with  respect to  the membership of  the
regional  panels. Moreover,  the appointment  of the
Governor of the Bank of  Canada would be subject  to
Senate ratification.

   18.  Training.  The Government of Canada proposes
that  section 92  of the  Constitution Act,  1867 be
amended to recognize  explicitly that labour  market
training   is  an   area  of   exclusive  provincial
jurisdiction. 

   19.  Immigration. While  recognizing the  federal
role  in   setting  Canadian  policy   and  national
objectives   with   respect   to   immigration,  the
Government of Canada is  prepared to negotiate  with
any   province   agreements   appropriate   to   the
circumstances    of    that    province    and    to
constitutionalize those agreements.

   20.  Culture.   The  Government  of  Canada  will
negotiate  with the  provinces, upon  their request,
agreements    appropriate    to    the    particular
circumstances of each province to define clearly the
role of each level of government. Where appropriate,
such agreements would be consti-tutionalized.

   21.  Broadcasting.  The   Government  of   Canada
proposes to:

       1. consult   with   the   provinces   on  the
          issuance of new licences;

       2. provide provincial  governments and  their
          agents  with  the  opportunity  to  evolve
          into     full     public      broadcasting
          undertakings   with  varied   programming,
          subject to CRTC regulation;

       3. further regionalize the operations of  the
          CRTC and expand the  roles of its regional
          offices;

       4. allow for provincial participation in  the
          nomination  of  regional  commissioners of
          the CRTC.

   22.  The  Residual   Power.  The   Government  of
Canada  proposes to  reserve  to itself  the  Peace,
Order and Good Government clause of the Constitution
Act,  1867 to  maintain its  authority to  deal with
national   matters  or  emergencies.   However,  the
Government of Canada is prepared to  transfer to the
provinces  authority  for  non-national  matters not
specifically  assigned  to  the  federal  government
under  the  Constitution  or  by  virtue  of   court
decisions.

   23.  The   Federal    Declaratory   Power.    The
Government  of  Canada  is  prepared  to  support  a
constitutional  amendment to remove  the declaratory
power set out in section 92(10)(c).

   24.  Recognizing     Areas     of      Provincial
Jurisdiction. Within this framework, the  Government
of Canada  is committed to ensuring the preservation
of   Canada's  existing  research   and  development
capacity obligations  for  international and  native
affairs.  The Government  of Canada  is prepared  to
recognize   the   exclusive   jurisdiction   of  the
provinces and discuss how  best to exercise its  own
responsibilities  in  a  manner  appropriate  to the
sector in the following areas:

       tourism
       forestry
       mining
       recreation
       housing
       municipal/urban affairs 

   25.  Legislative  Delegation.  The  Government of
Canada  endorses the recommendation of the Beaudoin-
Edwards Joint Parliamentary Committee that  there be
a constitutional amendment providing for  delegation
of  legislative  powers between  Parliament  and the
legislatures, and that there be  provisions inserted
in  the  Constitution to  enable  the  delegation of
legislative  authority  between  the two  levels  of
government   with  the   mutual   consent   of   the
legislative bodies involved.

   26.  Candidates  for  Streamlining.  In order  to
provide  Canadians with  the  best  service  at  the
lowest  possible  cost,  the federal  government  is
prepared   to   discuss  with   the   provinces  the
rationalization of government programs and  services
by  reviewing which  level  of government  can  best
deliver them. All proposals  from the provinces will
be  considered. As a  starting point, the Government
proposes  to discuss  the following  areas  with the
provinces:

       drug prosecutions
       wildlife conservation and protection
       transportation of dangerous goods
       soil and water conservation
       ferry services
       small craft harbours
       some aspects of financial sector regulation
       some aspects of bankruptcy law
       some aspects of unfair trade practices
       inspection programs

   27.  The Exercise  of the  Federal Spending Power
in Areas  of Exclusive Provincial  Jurisdiction. The
Government of Canada commits itself not to introduce
new Canada-wide shared-cost programs and conditional
transfers   in   areas   of   exclusive   provincial
jurisdiction without the approval  of at least seven
provinces representing 50 percent of the population.
This   undertaking  would   be  entrenched   in  the
Constitution.  The  constitutional  amendment  would
also provide  for  reasonable compensation  to  non-
participating provinces  which  establish their  own
programs meeting  the objectives of  the new Canada-
wide program. 

   28.  Working  Together:     a   Council  of   the
Federation.  The Government  of Canada  proposes the
entrenchment  of   a  Council  of   the  Federation,
composed  of  federal,  provincial  and  territorial
governments, that  would meet to decide on issues of
intergovernmental  coordination  and  collaboration.
The  Council  would have  the  mandate  to  vote  on
proposed   federal   legislation   to   enhance  the
functioning of the economic union under the proposed
new head of power; to  vote on guidelines for fiscal
harmonization and coordination as  well as to decide
on processes to improve future collaboration in this
area; and  to  make  decisions  on the  use  of  the
federal  spending power  on new  Canada-wide shared-
cost programs  and conditional transfers in areas of
exclusive provincial jurisdiction. All decisions  of
the  Council  of the  Federation  would require  the
approval of the federal  government and of at  least
seven  provinces  representing  50  percent  of  the
population.


Conclusion

How Do We Get There?

   If we had not felt that, after coming to this
   conclusion, we  were bound  to set  aside our
   private opinions on matters of  detail, if we

   had not felt ourselves bound to look at  what
   was  practicable,  not obstinately  rejecting
   the  opinions of  others nor adhering  to our
   own; if we had not met, I say, in a spirit of
   conciliation, and with an anxious, overruling
   desire   to  form   one  people   under   one
   government, we never would have succeeded.

                    Sir John A. Macdonald, 1865     


   Canadians  everywhere care  deeply  about Canada,
and  about  the  advantages  and  opportunities that
Canadian citizenship offers. 

   We  have the  chance  today  to make  our country
even   better    to   make  our   institutions  more
responsive,   our  economy   more   prosperous,  our
political    arrangements   more    effective,   our
governments more accountable. We have the chance  to
recognize  and express  the  character  of our  many
different  identities.  We  have  an  opportunity to
rediscover our purpose together and, in doing so, to
move forward as a people.

   The  proposals  advanced  by  the  Government  of
Canada in this paper  have been developed to respond
to concerns expressed by Canadians from all walks of
life. Canada's aboriginal  peoples, who were ignored
in the  original bargain  of Confederation and  have
been ignored too  often since, make up  one of those
constituencies. Another  is those who  feel strongly
that  the  original  bargain   has  not  been  fully
respected:  many Quebecers  who believe  that Canada
has  not  lived up  to  its  original commitment  to
respect   their    distinctiveness;   and   Atlantic
Canadians  whose average  incomes continue  to trail
substantially behind those  of other Canadians after
125 years. Western  Canadians have tended  in recent
years to  question  the responsiveness  of  national
institutions  that   reflect  only  marginally   the
regional  nature  of our  country. There  is  also a
larger constituency    the  many Canadians  who feel
that the  bargain has not  been sufficiently updated
to  meet our changing  needs. They  believe that the
terms  of our union should  be transformed   just as
Canada has  been  transformed    to  keep pace  with
changing social  patterns,  new economic  realities,
and changing values.

   These  proposals  are  being  put  forward  in  a
spirit of  openness, and in the hope  of renewal for
this country. They are intended to be comprehensive,
but  not  inflexible.  They  are  offered  with  the
intention  of  prompting   a  broad,  informed   and
specific  public  debate.  The  Government   is  now
inviting the people of Canada to  participate in the
process of  building a new  consensus for Canada,  a
consensus that  can be made real  through amendments
to  our  Constitution,  through  agreements  between
governments and through changes to the  way in which
our institutions serve us.

   These  proposals will  be referred  to a  Special
Joint  Committee. This  committee  has a  mandate to
travel widely within Canada, to speak with Canadians
and   with   their   provincial   and    territorial
representatives from  coast to coast to coast. Every
Canadian   will   have   the   right       and   the
responsibility    to participate. The Committee will
make  its report in  early 1992.  Upon receiving the
report,  the Government  will propose  a plan  for a
renewed Canada, for Parliament's consideration.

   The  Government believes that, at the end of this
national debate, we will understand ourselves better
and  appreciate our  country more  fully. Compromise
and tolerance will be required of all  of us, but we
will   build  on   a   foundation  of   values   and
institutions that  we care about  and that will  not
change.  And we will  have worked  together toward a
vision  of  the  country  that  we  can  all  share,
reflected in our Constitution.


Appendix I

List of Proposals


Part I: Shared Citizenship and Diversity

   1.  Reaffirming  the  rights   and  freedoms   of
citizens.  The  Government of  Canada  reaffirms the
basic rights set out in the Charter as a fundamental
feature of the Canadian Constitution. The Government
of  Canada proposes  that  the  Canadian Charter  of
Rights and Freedoms be amended to guarantee property
rights.  The Government  of Canada  further proposes
that  the  votes  necessary  for  Parliament   or  a
provincial  legislature   to  invoke  the   override
(section 33) be changed from a simple majority to 60
percent  of  the   members  of  Parliament   or  the
provincial legislature.

   2.  Recognition of  Quebec's distinctiveness  and
Canada's   linguistic  duality.  The  Government  of
Canada proposes  that a  section be included  in the
Charter  stating  that  the  Charter of  Rights  and
Freedoms shall be interpreted in a manner consistent
with the recognition of Quebec as a distinct society
within Canada. The section would read:

25.1  (                     1                     )
   This Charter  shall be  interpreted in a  manner
   consistent with

      (a)  the preservation and promotion of Quebec
      as a distinct society within Canada; and


      (b)  the preservation  of  the  existence  of
      French-speaking Canadians,  primarily located
      in Quebec but also present throughout Canada,
      and  English-speaking  Canadians,   primarily
      located  outside Quebec  but also  present in
      Quebec.

   (                      2                      )
   For  the purposes  of subsection  (1), "distinct
   society", in relation to Quebec, includes


      (a) a French-speaking majority;
      (b) a unique culture; and 
      (c) a civil law tradition.

(See  the Annex at  the end  of Part I  for excerpts
from the Charter: present sections 1, 25, 27, 28 and
31 and proposed section 25.1.)

   3.  Aboriginal     participation    in    current
constitutional  deliberations.  The  Government   of
Canada  is  committed  to ensuring  that  aboriginal
peoples participate  in  the current  constitutional
deliberations. 

   4.  Aboriginal  self-government.  The  Government
of Canada proposes an  amendment to the Constitution
to  entrench   a   general  justiciable   right   to
aboriginal   self-government  within   the  Canadian
federation and subject  to the  Canadian Charter  of
Rights and Freedoms, with the nature of the right to
self-government   described  so  as   to  facilitate
interpretation of that right by the courts. In order
to  allow  an  opportunity  for  the  Government  of
Canada, the  governments  of the  provinces and  the
territories,  and aboriginal  peoples to  come  to a
common understanding of  the content of this  right,
its enforceability would be delayed for  a period of
up to 10 years.  The Special Joint Committee  should
examine the  broad  parameters of  the  right to  be
entrenched in the Constitution and the jurisdictions
that aboriginal governments would exercise.

   5.  Aboriginal   constitutional   process.    The
Government  of Canada proposes the entrenchment of a
constitutional process to address aboriginal matters
that   are   not   dealt   with   in   the   current
constitutional deliberations and to monitor progress
made   in   the   negotiations   of  self-government
agreements.

   6.  Representation of  aboriginal peoples  in the
Senate.  The  Government  of  Canada  proposes  that
aboriginal  representation should be guaranteed in a
reformed Senate.

   7.  A Canada  clause  in  the  Constitution.  The
Government of Canada proposes that a "Canada clause"
that acknowledges who we are as a people, and who we
aspire  to  be, be  entrenched in  section 2  of the
Constitution Act,  1867.  The Government  of  Canada
believes  that  it  would  be  appropriate  for  the
following characteristics and values to be reflected
in such a statement:

      a  federation whose identity  encompasses the
      characteristics  of each  province, territory
      and community;

      the equality of women and men;

      a commitment  to fairness,  openness and full
      participation in Canada's citizenship  by all
      people without regard to race, colour, creed,
      physical  or mental  disability, or  cultural
      background;

      recognition that the aboriginal  peoples were
      historically self-governing, and  recognition
      of their rights within Canada;

      recognition   of   the   responsibility    of
      governments   to   preserve   Canada's    two
      linguistic majorities and minorities;

      the special responsibility borne by Quebec to
      preserve and promote its distinct society;

      the contribution to the building of  a strong
      Canada of peoples from many cultures and lands;
      
      the importance of tolerance  for individuals,
      groups and communities;

      a  commitment to the objective of sustainable
      development in recognition of  the importance
      of  the land, the air  and the water  and our
      responsibility  to preserve  and protect  the
      environment for future generations;

      respect for the  rights of  its citizens  and
      constituent communities as set  forth in  the
      Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms;

      the free flow  of people, goods, services and
      capital  throughout  the  Canadian   economic
      union   and  the  principle  of  equality  of
      opportunity throughout Canada;

      a  commitment   to  the  well-being  of   all
      Canadians;

      a  commitment to  a democratic  parliamentary
      system of government;
      
      the  balance  that  is   especially  Canadian
      between  personal and  collective freedom  on
      the  one  hand and,  on  the other  hand, the
      personal  and collective  responsibility that
      we all share with each other.


Part II:    Responsive  Institutions  for  a  Modern
Canada

   8.  House of  Commons. The  Government of  Canada
commits itself to a process of further parliamentary
reform to give individual MPs more free votes and to
reduce the application of votes of confidence.

   9.  Principles  of  Senate  reform:  an  elected,
effective and more equitable Senate.  The Government
of Canada proposes that: 

      the Senate be directly elected; 

      Senate  elections coincide with  elections to
      the House of Commons;

      the Senate's  composition  provide  for  much
      more  equitable  provincial  and  territorial
      representation than at present; 

      the  House  of  Commons  remain  the  primary
      legislative body;

      as a general rule,  in order for measures  to
      become law, approval  of both the Senate  and
      the House of Commons should be required as at
      present;

      for  matters  of language  and  culture,  the
      Senate would  also  have  a  double  majority
      special voting rule;

      for matters of national  importance, such  as
      national defence  and  international  issues,
      the  Senate would have a six-month suspensive
      veto.  Following  expiry  of  the  suspensive
      veto, the House  of Commons would be required
      to  repass the legislation  for it  to become
      law;

      since the Senate is not a confidence chamber,
      the Senate would  have no legislative role in
      relation to appropriation bills  and measures
      to   raise    funds    including    borrowing
      authorities;

      guaranteed  representation  be  provided  for
      aboriginal Canadians in the Senate;

      the  Senate  continue  to have  a  mandate to
      conduct  special  inquiries  into  issues  of
      public policy.

   10.  Details  of Senate reform. The Government of
Canada proposes  that the Special Joint Committee of
Parliament consider the following issues:

      the form of direct election to the Senate;

      the  appropriate number  and distribution  of
      Senate seats;

      in consultation with the  aboriginal peoples,
      the appropriate  representation  of  Canada's
      First Peoples.

   11.  Senate  Ratification   of  Appointments   to
Regulatory  Boards and  Agencies. The  Government of
Canada proposes that the  Senate be given a  mandate
to  ratify the  appointment of  the Governor  of the
Bank of Canada and the appointments of the heads  of
national cultural institutions, such as the Canadian
Broadcasting  Corporation, the National  Film Board,
the  National  Library, the  National  Archives, the
national  museums,  the  Canadian  Film  Development
Corporation,  the Canada  Council  and the  National
Arts  Centre,  as well  as the  heads  of regulatory
boards  and  agencies such  as  the National  Energy
Board,  the  National  Transportation  Agency,   the
Canadian  Radio-television  and   Telecommunications
Commission,  the Immigration and  Refugee Board, and
the   proposed  Canadian   Environmental  Assessment
Agency. 

   12.  Appointments  to   the   Supreme  Court   of
Canada. The  Government of  Canada will  introduce a
constitutional amendment  to provide for  a role for
the provinces  and the territories in  Supreme Court
appointments whereby appointments  would be made  by
the  federal  government  from  lists   of  nominees
submitted by provincial and territorial governments,
the  individual appointed  being  acceptable to  the
Queen's Privy Council of Canada. 
 
   In addition, the  Government of  Canada would  be
prepared  to proceed  with the  entrenchment in  the
Constitution   of  the   Supreme   Court   and   its
composition if  it were  found desirable to  proceed
with any unanimity items in the final package.

   13.  The  Constitutional  Amending  Formula.  The
Government of  Canada would be  prepared to  proceed
with changes to the amending formula as specified in
the Meech Lake Accord if  a consensus on this matter
were  to  develop;  if  the  accession  of  existing
territories to provincehood  were to proceed on  the
basis  of the  current amending  formula; and  if it
were found desirable to  proceed ultimately with any
items  requiring  unanimous  consent  in  the  final
package.

Part III:  Preparing for a more Prosperous Future

   14.  Broadening  s.   121,   the  common   market
clause.  The  Government  of  Canada  proposes  that
section 121 of the Constitution Act, 1867 be amended
to read as follows:

   121.   (1)Canada  is  an  economic  union  within
          which   persons,   goods,   services   and
          capital  may move freely  without barriers

          or  restrictions  based  on  provincial or
          territorial boundaries.

       (2)Neither the  Parliament  or Government  of
       Canada nor the legislatures or governments of
       the   provinces  shall  by  law  or  practice
       contravene   the   principle   expressed   in
       subsection (1).

       (3)Subsection (2) does not render invalid

          (a)  a  law of  the  Parliament  of Canada
          enacted  to  further  the  principles   of
          equalization or regional development; 

          (b)  a  law  of  a provincial  legislature
          enacted in  relation to  the reduction  of
          economic   disparities   between   regions
          wholly within  a  province that  does  not
          create  barriers or restrictions  that are
          more  onerous  in  relation  to   persons,
          goods, services  or  capital from  outside
          the province  than it does  in relation to
          persons,  goods, services or  capital from
          a region within the province; or

          (c)  a law of the  Parliament of Canada or
          of  the legislature of a province that has
          been declared  by Parliament to be  in the
          national interest.

       (4)A declaration referred to in paragraph (3)
       (c)  shall   have  no  effect  unless  it  is
       approved by the governments of  at least two-
       thirds of  the provinces  that  have, in  the
       aggregate,  according  to  the  then   latest
       general census,  at least 50  percent of  the
       population of all the provinces.

       (5)This section shall come into force on July
       1, 1995.

   15.  Power to  Manage  the  Economic  Union.  The
Government of  Canada  proposes that  the  following
section  be  added  to the  Constitution  Act,  1867
immediately after section 91:

   91A.   (1)Without  altering  any  other authority
          of  the Parliament of Canada to make laws,
          the  Parliament of Canada  may exclusively
          make laws  in relation to  any matter that
          it  declares   to  be  for  the  efficient
          functioning of the economic union.

       (2)An Act of  the Parliament  of Canada  made
       under  this  section  shall  have  no  effect
       unless it  is approved by the  governments of
       at  least two  thirds  of the  provinces that
       have, in the aggregate, according to the then
       latest general census, at least 50 percent of
       the population of all the provinces.

       (3)The  legislative assembly of  any province
       that  is not  among the  provinces that  have
       approved an  Act of the  Parliament of Canada
       under subsection (2) may expressly declare by
       resolution  supported  by 60  percent  of its
       members that the Act  of Parliament does  not
       apply in the province.

       (4)A declaration  made  under subsection  (3)
       shall cease to have  effect three years after
       it is made or on such earlier  date as may be
       specified in the declaration.

   The  Government of Canada also  proposes that the
Special Joint Committee consider whether the opting-
out provision should be renewable.

   16.  Harmonization  of   economic  policies.  The
Government of  Canada proposes to develop,  with the
provinces, an  annual  timetable to  allow for  more
open and visible budget-making processes.

   The  Government  of  Canada proposes  to develop,
with  the  provinces,   guidelines  to  improve  the
coordination   of    fiscal    policies   and    the
harmonization  of  fiscal  policies  with   Canada's
monetary  policy.  Once  approved,  these guidelines
would  be set in  federal legislation  under the new
economic union power. Accordingly, these  guidelines
would require the approval of at least seven  of the
provinces representing 50 percent of the population,
and up to three provinces could opt out.

   The  Government also proposes to discuss with the
provinces the establishment of an independent agency
to monitor  and evaluate the  macroeconomic policies
of the federal and provincial governments. 

   17.  Reforms   to  the   Bank  of   Canada.   The
Government of Canada proposes  to amend the Bank  of
Canada Act to make it clear that  the mandate of the
Bank is to achieve and preserve  price stability. To
ensure  regional  representation  on  the  Board  of
Directors of the Bank of Canada, the Government will
solicit  the  views  of provincial  and  territorial
governments  and consult  with  them  before  making
appointments   to  the   Board.  In   addition,  the
Government proposes to create regional  consultative
panels  to  advise the  Directors  of  the  Bank  on
regional economic  conditions.  The Government  will
also solicit the views of provincial and territorial
governments with  respect to  the membership  of the
regional  panels. Moreover,  the appointment  of the
Governor of the  Bank of Canada would  be subject to
Senate ratification.

   18.  Training.  The Government of Canada proposes
that  section 92  of the  Constitution Act,  1867 be
amended to recognize  explicitly that labour  market
training   is  an   area  of   exclusive  provincial
jurisdiction. 

   19.  Immigration. While  recognizing the  federal
role  in   setting  Canadian  policy   and  national
objectives   with   respect   to   immigration,  the
Government of  Canada is prepared to  negotiate with
any   province   agreements   appropriate   to   the
circumstances    of    that    province    and    to
constitutionalize those agreements.

   20.  Culture.   The  Government  of  Canada  will
negotiate  with the  provinces, upon  their request,
agreements    appropriate    to    the    particular
circumstances of each province to define clearly the
role of each level of government. Where appropriate,
such agreements would be consti-tutionalized.

   21.  Broadcasting.  The   Government  of   Canada
proposes to:

       1. consult   with   the   provinces   on  the
          issuance of new licences;

       2. provide provincial  governments and  their
          agents  with  the  opportunity  to  evolve
          into     full     public      broadcasting
          undertakings   with  varied   programming,
          subject to CRTC regulation;

       3. further regionalize the operations of  the
          CRTC and  expand the roles of its regional
          offices;


       4. allow for provincial participation in  the
          nomination  of  regional  commissioners of
          the CRTC.


   22.  The  Residual   Power.  The   Government  of
Canada  proposes  to reserve  to  itself the  Peace,
Order and Good Government clause of the Constitution
Act,  1867 to  maintain its  authority to  deal with
national   matters  or  emergencies.   However,  the
Government of  Canada is prepared to transfer to the
provinces  authority  for  non-national  matters not
specifically  assigned  to  the  federal  government
under   the  Constitution  or  by  virtue  of  court
decisions.

   23.  The   Federal    Declaratory   Power.    The
Government  of  Canada  is  prepared  to  support  a
constitutional  amendment to remove  the declaratory
power set out in section 92(10)(c).

   24.  Recognizing     Areas     of      Provincial
Jurisdiction. Within this framework, the  Government
of Canada is committed to ensuring  the preservation
of   Canada's  existing  research   and  development
capacity obligations  for  international and  native
affairs. The  Government of  Canada  is prepared  to
recognize   the   exclusive   jurisdiction   of  the
provinces and discuss how  best to exercise its  own
responsibilities  in  a  manner  appropriate  to the
sector in the following areas:

       tourism
       forestry
       mining
       recreation
       housing
       municipal/urban affairs 


   25.  Legislative  Delegation.  The  Government of
Canada  endorses the recommendation of the Beaudoin-
Edwards Joint Parliamentary Committee that  there be
a constitutional amendment providing for  delegation
of  legislative  powers between  Parliament  and the
legislatures, and that there be  provisions inserted
in  the  Constitution  to enable  the  delegation of
legislative  authority between  the  two  levels  of
government   with   the   mutual   consent   of  the
legislative bodies involved.

   26.  Candidates  for  Streamlining.  In order  to
provide  Canadians  with  the  best  service at  the
lowest  possible cost,  the  federal  government  is
prepared  to   discuss   with  the   provinces   the
rationalization of government programs and  services
by  reviewing which  level  of  government can  best
deliver them. All proposals from the provinces  will
be considered.  As a starting point,  the Government
proposes to  discuss  the following  areas with  the
provinces:

       drug prosecutions
       wildlife conservation and protection
       transportation of dangerous goods
       soil and water conservation
       ferry services
       small craft harbours
       some aspects of financial sector regulation
       some aspects of bankruptcy law
       some aspects of unfair trade practices
       inspection programs

   27.  The Exercise  of the  Federal Spending Power
in Areas  of Exclusive Provincial  Jurisdiction. The
Government of Canada commits itself not to introduce
new Canada-wide shared-cost programs and conditional
transfers   in   areas   of   exclusive   provincial
jurisdiction without the approval of at least  seven
provinces representing 50 percent of the population.
This   undertaking  would   be  entrenched   in  the
Constitution.  The  constitutional  amendment  would
also provide  for  reasonable compensation  to  non-
participating provinces  which  establish their  own
programs meeting  the objectives of the  new Canada-
wide program. 

   28.  Working  Together:     a   Council  of   the
Federation.  The Government  of Canada  proposes the
entrenchment  of   a  Council  of   the  Federation,
composed  of  federal,  provincial  and  territorial
governments, that would meet to decide  on issues of
intergovernmental  coordination  and  collaboration.
The  Council  would  have  the  mandate  to vote  on
proposed   federal   legislation   to   enhance  the
functioning of the economic union under the proposed
new head of power; to vote  on guidelines for fiscal
harmonization  and coordination as well as to decide
on processes to improve future collaboration in this
area;  and to  make  decisions  on  the use  of  the
federal  spending power  on new  Canada-wide shared-
cost programs and conditional transfers in  areas of
exclusive provincial jurisdiction. All decisions  of
the  Council  of the  Federation  would  require the
approval of the federal  government and of at  least
seven  provinces  representing  50  percent  of  the
population.